**South Italy**

**Taranto**

**12.**

**Head of a Woman**

82.AD.93.8

<span class="smcaps">Date: 350–300 BC</span>

<span class="smcaps">Fabric</span>: bright, deep
orange in color (Munsell 5 yr 7/6), with many reflective and calcareous
inclusions (5 yr 7/6) and a friable and dusty consistency; a layer of
white slip is preserved especially on the right half of the face and
neck.

H: 14.4 cm; W: 11.5 cm; H (face): 10.2 cm

<span class="smcaps">Condition:</span> Intact, with a
number of cracks and incrustations distributed over the entire surface.

<span class="smcaps">Provenance</span>: – 1982, Antike
Kunst Palladion (Basel, Switzerland), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum,
1982.

<span class="smcaps">Bibliography:</span> Unpublished.

This female head has a broad, full face; the eyes are small and
almond-shaped with thick eyelids; the nose is straight; the mouth has
fleshy, barely open lips; the chin is rounded. The hair is combed into
short, fine, curly locks at the sides of the face, leaving the ears
uncovered; the locks appear to be held by a ribbon whose ends fall in
the middle of the forehead. On the head and at the nape of the neck, the
hair, parted in the middle, is treated summarily in wavy locks that are
rendered through light incisions. The figure wears lunate earrings
interrupted in the middle by a knurled thread. This type of head,
thought not especially widespread, is present in the Tarentine
coroplastic repertory of the Early Hellenistic period. Heads of
statuettes from the Via di Palma votive deposit, datable to the fourth
century <span class="smcaps">BC,</span> show the same
broad facial structure and the hairstyle consisting of short, curly
locks framing the forehead; this type is also found in the fourth
century <span class="smcaps">BC</span> in busts of
banqueters.[^1] The type of “lunate” earrings, with two vertical
elements set midway along the crescent, is well attested in Taranto and
can be found in the funerary deposits from the second half of the fourth
century <span class="smcaps">BC.</span>[^2]

[^1]: The head from Via Di Palma, see <span
    class="smcaps">Iacobone</span> 1988, p. 34, pl.
    26c, generally dated to the fourth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC.</span> A similar head comes
    from Saturo (crate 713).

[^2]: For the earring type, see R. A. Lunsingh Scheurleer, “Terracotta
    ‘Imitation’ Jewellery,” *BABesch* 57 (1982), pp. 192–99, no. 5, fig.
    6. In general, on the typologies of earrings recurrent in Taras
    during the Hellenistic period, see T. Schojer, “Orecchini,” in <span
    class="smcaps">De Juliis</span> 1984, pp. 129–32,
    no. 57.
