---
title: Statue of a Standing Siren A
cat: 2
fabric: >
  Light orange incolor, and in certain places a slightly more intense shade (Munsell 7.5 yr 8/3); covered by a white slip (<em>latte di calce</em>). Traces of red are preserved on the claws.
condition: >
  This statue was reconstructed from several fragments; gaps can be seen in the short chiton and in the right claw. In the sections where the layer of white pigment has been preserved, the surface appears very smooth, especially in the hands and face.
bibliography: >
  Unpublished.
provenance: >
  1982, Antike Kunst Palladion (Basel, Switzerland), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1982.
---
The Siren stands in a meditative pose. She is resting her long, slender
legs, which terminate in four long talons, atop a rounded, rocky base
marked by a series of protuberances. The upper part of her body is human
in appearance: the right arm is folded beneath the breasts and the left
hand is propped under the chin. The head is slightly tilted to the left,
in keeping with an iconographic scheme generally employed to express
grief or sadness. The features of the face resemble those of Orpheus.
The face is full and round, with a prominent chin. The neck is short,
marked by the “rings of Venus.” The eyes are asymmetrical, with the
upper eyelid more pronounced and the arched eyebrows situated close to
the eyelids. The nose is straight, with a rounded tip. The lips are
fleshy and well designed. The face is framed by a hairstyle
characterized by a series of roughly modeled, short, twisting curls
applied to the top of the head and partially covering the ears. The
figure is dressed in a short chiton with an *apoptygma* (capelike fold)
that clings to her body, forming pleats that are flattened on the front,
while on the sides they open out as if they were tossing in the wind,
with beautifully hand-modeled ruffles. A sash is wrapped high around the
chest, with two shoulder straps crossing over the bust. In the back, the
drapery extends to form a broad, tubular tail, flared toward the end
like a fan. This tail also helped to balance the statue. In the back of
the figure, the crossing shoulder straps cannot be seen.
