---
title: Fragment of a Head
cat: 22
fabric: >
  light beige color (Munsell 2.5 yr 8/3), very fine, with a porous consistency and small, reflective inclusions; surface covered by a slip of diluted light-yellowish clay.
condition: > 
  Part of the front is preserved, along with the right side of the face and the attachment of the neck. A layer of soil incrustation is present over the white slip.
provenance: > 
  – 1982 Antike Kunst Palladion (Basel, Switzerland), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1982.
bibliography: >
  Unpublished.
---
This fragment, probably once part of a statue, has an oval face and full
regular features. The elongated eyes have very thick eyelids with sharp
edges. The pupil, iris, and tear duct are emphasized, and the eyebrows
are well defined; there is a distinct juncture between the forehead and
the lowered arch of the eyebrows. The nose is straight, and it directly
joins the eyebrow arches; the mouth has fleshy, parted lips, a sinuous
profile, and small dimples at the sides. The gaze is slightly lowered.
The surface of the face has been carefully smoothed.

The definition of the facial features finds parallels in Tarentine
terracotta heads dating from the middle of the fifth century <span
class="smcaps">BC,</span> such as in the elongated
eyes and eyelids already present in the Severe style, and elements that
can be found even in mature Classicism, such as the fleshy cheeks
enlivened by dimples at the corners of the mouth and nostrils, the broad
flat chin, and the flat arch of the eyebrows.[^1] The head may show the
influence of a sculptural prototype, perhaps in bronze, as is suggested
by the accuracy of the features, which are close to the Attic style of
the second half of the fifth century <span
class="smcaps">BC.</span> A comparison could be made
with the marble head of Athena in Taranto, dated to this period, which
shares the same tendency to emphasize the eyelids, the puffed-out
cheeks, and those features that confer greater organic qualities and
lively expression to the faces.[^2] The details of the sensuous, fleshy
lips and the lower part of the face clearly point to the Cirò Apollo,
datable to 440–430 <span class="smcaps">BC</span>,
suggesting the same Attic stylistic culture.[^3] The head of Theseus
from the pediment of the Temple of Apollo Sosianus in Rome, which has
been dated around the third quarter of the fifth century <span
class="smcaps">BC,</span> would also seem comparable,
especially in the puffy flesh, the fleshy cheeks, and the thick
eyelids.[^4] It is difficult to place the Getty head chronologically.
Stylistic analysis and comparisons cited above suggest dating it to
about 440–430 <span class="smcaps">BC.</span>

[^1]: For the characteristics of Tarentine coroplastic art of the fifth
    century <span class="smcaps">BC,</span> see <span
    class="smcaps">Herdejürgen</span> 1971, pp. 14–25;
    <span class="smcaps">Orlandini</span> 1983, pp.
    463–64. Among the possible comparisons in terracotta, see a
    fragmentary head possibly from Taranto dated to 440–420 <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span> in <span
    class="smcaps">Schürmann</span> 1989, no. 133, pl.
    2, and the head in Fischer-Hansen 1992, no. 53, with bibliography.
    From other contexts, see also the terracotta head from Reggio di
    Calabria in R. Ross Holloway, *Influences and Styles in the Late
    Archaic and Early Classical Greek Sculpture of Sicily and Magna
    Graecia*, Publications d’histoire de l’art et d’archéologie de
    l’Université catholique de Louvain 6 (Leuven, 1975), pl. 58, fig. 1,
    and the heads cited in <span
    class="smcaps">Quarles van Ufford</span> 1941,
    figs. 56–57, p. 108. See, further, the statuette of Artemis, dating
    to the second half of the fifth century <span
    class="smcaps">b. c.</span>, at the Allard Pierson
    Museum in Amsterdam, discussed by L. Kahil, s.v. “Artemis,” *LIMC* 1
    (1984), pp. 618–753, esp. no. 572. In addition, the head from a
    cistern on Temple Hill at Agrigento shows similar eyelids; see G.
    Pugliese Carratelli and G. Fiorentini, Agrigento: Museo archeologico
    (Palermo, 1992), pp. 86–87, fig. 89.

[^2]: For the marble head of Athena in Taranto, see <span
    class="smcaps">Catoni and Settis</span> 2008, p.
    319, no.19 and <span class="smcaps">Belli
    Pasqua</span> 1995, pp. 31–38. See also the marble female head in
    Copenhagen, a Tarentine work of 460–450 <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span> comparable to the Getty
    head in a number of its facial features (for example, the certain
    heaviness in the lower portion of the face), discussed in <span
    class="smcaps">Fischer-Hansen</span> 1992, no. 7,
    p. 37.

[^3]: For the acrolithic marble head from the Temple of Apollo Aleo at
    Cirò, see <span class="smcaps">Settis and
    Parra</span> 2005, pp. 259–62; and Madeleine Mertens-Horn, “Resti di
    due grandi statue di Apollo ritrovati nel santuario di Apollo Aleo
    di Cirò,” in <span class="smcaps">*Santuari della
    Magna Grecia in Calabria*</span> 1996*,* pp. 261–65.

[^4]: See <span class="smcaps">La Rocca</span> 1985,
    esp. pp. 61–62, pl. XIII.
