---
title: Statuette of a Dancer
cat: 30
fabric: >
  light beige in color (Munsell 10 yr 8/2–8/3), porous. Polychromy: on a white slip (white lead), pink (face), light blue and turquoise (leaves of the wreath), purple (hair), violet (himation and chiton), and white (clothing and face). Head and body were made with two bivalve molds; the back features an oval vent hole; there is a small hole where the statuette would have attached to a base.
condition: >
  The statuette has no supporting base and is missing its left foot. Also missing are a number of ornaments from the wreath. There are losses in the paint and ground layer overall and small chip losses in the leaves of the headdress and the bottom of the drapery. There is a modern hole drilled in the bottom (possibly for diagnostic testing); there are some root marks on the back surface and grayish accretions in many places, especially around the neck, the back of the shoulders, and the lower part of the drapery on both sides. There is a dark reddish brown stain-accretion on the left hip.
provenance: >
  By 1994–1996, Barbara and Lawrence Fleischman (New York, New York), donated to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1996.
bibliography: >
  Passion for antiquities 1994, no. 221, p. 354; Acquisitions 1996–98, p. 67; Getty 2010, p. 117.
---
The female dancer has a petite, elongated physique. Her left arm is bent
and resting on the hip, while the right arm holds the folds of the
himation in front as she makes a subtle dance step, in which the left
leg extends in front of the right; the lowered head turns toward the
right. The long chiton extends to the feet, the himation wraps softly
around the figure, and a hem held back by the left hand falls to one
side in zigzagging folds. Following the movement of the figure, the
garments form a series of fluttering folds at the feet. The face has
delicate features with large spherical earrings and the head features a
melon-style hairdo, with a round bun on the top of the head and a wreath
decorated with ivy and two small, round pieces of fruit.[^1]

The statuette can be assigned, both through typology and clay, to the
Tarentine milieu. The type of female dancer articulated in space
probably originated in Attica at the beginning of the fourth century
<span class="smcaps">BC.</span>[^2] It spread into the
Tanagra repertory, recurring in South Italy and especially in Tarentine
funerary deposits of the third century and the first quarter of the
second century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>, when
there was a notable recovery in Taranto of funerary coroplastic
production with an enriched iconographic repertory and improved
technical quality.[^3] A number of Tarentine statuettes present a
similar iconographic scheme and stylistic characteristics, including the
elongated torso and the dynamism of the figure, similar to the type of
the late third-century BC bronze statuette in the Metropolitan Museum of
Art known as the Baker Dancer<span
class="smcaps">,</span> in which elements of
Alexandrian style have been recognized.[^4]

The Getty dancer shows a clear Dionysian character, to which the ivy
wreath also points; Dionysian elements played a dominant role in the
Tarentine funerary iconography of the fourth and third centuries <span
class="smcaps">BC.</span>[^5] Further evidence of the
popularity of the type in the coroplastic production comes from Sicily,
particularly in a number of examples of female dancers from Morgantina,
Syracuse, Cefalù, and Monte Saraceno, generally dating from the third
century <span class="smcaps">BC.</span>[^6]

Female dancers are well attested in the Hellenistic period**,**
including among the votive deposits of the sanctuaries of Demeter.
Corinth, for instance, is the source of a number of examples datable
between the end of the fourth century and the beginning of the third
century <span class="smcaps">BC.</span> These show a
number of recurring characteristics, such as the left arm on the hip;
the drapery that entirely envelops the figure, forming fluttering folds
in motion; and a foreshortened composition.[^7] Figures of female
dancers that are very similar to this one, characterized by a rich
movement of the drapery—which is reminiscent of the stylistic signature
of some Hellenistic sculptors—have also been found in Priene, Pergamon,
and Troy, where they would continue to be produced until the first
century <span class="smcaps">BC.</span>[^8]

<br />

#### Appendix

The statuette was examined under polarized light microscopy (PLM) and
X-ray fluorescence. The blue was identified as Egyptian blue and the
white as white lead. There is no indication of modern repainting.

[^1]: For the clothing of the dancers, see L. Forti, “La vita
    quotidiana,” in <span class="smcaps">Pugliese
    Carratelli</span> 1988, pp. 285–326, see esp. fig. 353 (on the
    right, a statuette of a female dancer from the Museo Archeologico
    Nazionale of Taranto, dating from the third century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>).

[^2]: The pose of this type seems to derive from the Attic type of the
    veiled female dancer, see <span
    class="smcaps">Jeammet 2003</span>b, cat. 95.

[^3]: For the examples from the Tarentine funerary deposits, see <span
    class="smcaps">Graepler</span> 1984*,* pp. 99–102,
    pl. XXVII, no. 2; and <span
    class="smcaps">Graepler</span> 1997, pp. 125–29,
    figs. 95, 99–100, 101–2 **(**datable to between 225 and 175 <span
    class="smcaps">BC),</span> and p. 222, fig. 248 (a
    female dancer that presents a comparable pose and mode of drapery,
    datable to the third quarter of the third century <span
    class="smcaps">BC)</span>; E. Lippolis, L.
    Giardino, and R. Sciotti, *Emergenze e problemi archeologici:
    Manduria, Taranto, Heraclea* (Manduria, 1990), p. 74 (dancer from a
    tomb in the Contrada Vaccarella in Taranto); and <span
    class="smcaps">Reeder</span> 1988, no. 86, p. 179
    (draped female figure with hand on hip, from Taranto, datable to the
    third century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>). The
    type is also present in Metaponto; see P. C. Sestrieri, “Metaponto:
    Campagne di scavo (marzo–aprile 1939),” *NSc*, ser. 7, no. 1 (1940),
    pp. 51–122, esp. pp. 68–69, fig. 17.

[^4]: For Hellenistic statuettes of dancers, see F. G. Naerebout, “The
    Baker Dancer and Other Hellenistic Statuettes of Dancers:
    Illustrating the Use of Imagery in the Study of Dance in Ancient
    Greek World,” *Imago Musicae* 18–19 (2001–2), pp. 59–83. For the
    Baker Dancer, see also D. B. Thompson, “A Bronze Dancer from
    Alexandria,” *AJA* 54, no. 4 (Oct.–Dec. 1950), pp. 371–75.

[^5]: On objects assignable to the Dionysian sphere in Tarentine
    funerary ritual, see D. Graepler, “La necropoli e la cultura
    funeraria,” in *AttiTaranto 41, 2001* (Taranto, 2002), pp. 193–218.
    In general, for the role of dance in the Dionysian cult, see M. H.
    Delavaud Roux, “Danse et transe: La danse au service du culte de
    Dionysos dans l’antiquité grecque,” in *Transe et théâtre*: *Actes
    de la table ronde internationel, Montpellier, 3–5 mars 1988*
    (Montpellier, 1989), pp. 31–53. See also G. Ricciardelli, “Mito e
    perfomance nelle associazioni dionisiache,” in *<span
    class="smcaps">Tra Orfeo e Pitagora</span>* 2000,
    pp. 265–82; and H. A. Shapiro et al., s.v. “Dance,” *ThesCRA* 2
    (2004), pp. 299–343, esp. p. 333. For the connections between the
    dancers and representations of nymphs, see <span
    class="smcaps">Jeammet</span> 200<span
    class="smcaps">3</span>b, cat. 95.

[^6]: For Centuripe, see <span
    class="smcaps">Besques</span> 1986, pl. 37a
    (statuette attributable to the third century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>); <span
    class="smcaps">Libertini</span> 1947, pp. 287–88,
    no. 5, and p. 309, no. 2; <span
    class="smcaps">Bieber</span> 1961b, figs. 553–56;
    <span class="smcaps">Winter</span> 1903, p. 153,
    no. 9; <span class="smcaps">Schürmann</span> 1989,
    nos. 790–92, fig. 132 (end of the third century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>). For Morgantina, see
    <span class="smcaps">Bell</span> 1981, pp. 64–65,
    nos. 454–56 (group of dancers dating from the third century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>). For the statuette of a
    dancer found on the acropolis of Monte Saraceno datable to the end
    of the fourth century or the beginning of the third century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>, see A. Siracusano,
    *Monte Saraceno di Ravanusa: Un ventennio di ricerche e studi*
    (1996), pp. 7–40, pl. XXXVIII, no. 2. For female dancers from
    necropoleis of Cefalù of the end of the third century, see C. Greco,
    “Le terrecotte figurate,” in A. Tullio, ed., *Cefalù: La necropoli
    ellenistica 1* (Rome, 2008), pp. 121–26, TC 4–5, pl. XXIV, no. 2.

[^7]: For the dancers of Corinth, see <span
    class="smcaps">Merker 2000,</span> pp. 151–56.

[^8]: On the relations between Taras, Pergamon, and Priene, see <span
    class="smcaps">Graepler</span> <span
    class="smcaps">1996</span>*,* p. 236; M. Bell,
    “Hellenistic Terracottas of South Italy and Sicily,” in <span
    class="smcaps">Uhlenbrock</span> 1990, pp. 64–70;
    R. Higgins,“Tarentine Terracottas,” in *Taranto nella civiltà della
    Magna Grecia*, *AttiTaranto* *10, 1970* (Taranto, 1971), pp. 267–81.
    See the pieces in <span
    class="smcaps">Higgins</span> 1967, pl. 58c (from
    Priene, first century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>) and in E. Töpperwein,
    *Terrakotten von Pergamon* (Berlin, 1976), pp. 43–45, no. 169
    (fragment of a statuette with a cluster of folds around the ankles,
    similar to this piece, datable to the third century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>). For a group of dancers
    from funerary deposits of the vicinity of Troy and datable to around
    340 <span class="smcaps">BC</span>, see S.
    Besques, “Le commerce des figurines en terre-cuite au IV siècle av.
    J. C. entre les ateliers ioniens et l’attique,” in *Proceedings of
    the 10th International Congress of Classical Archaeology,*
    *Ankara–Izmir, 23–30 September 1973* (Ankara, 1978), pp. 617–26; see
    also the statuette of a dancer from Perge (Turkey), see J. Inan,
    “Eine hellenistiche Tänzerin aus Perge,” in *Akten des XIII.
    Internationalen Kongress für Klassische Archäologie, Berlin 1988*
    (Mainz am Rhein, 1990), pp. 347–48.
