**South Italy**

**Taranto and the Apulian Region**

**31.**

**Comic Mask**

96.AD.247

<span class="smcaps">Date: 300–200</span> BC

<span class="smcaps">Fabric</span>: beige in color
(Munsell 7.5 yr 8/3–8/4), very hard and compact, with many small
reflective inclusions; extensive traces of polychromy over a layer of
white slip; brownish red (hair), pink (complexion).

H: 9 cm; W: 8.4 cm

<span class="smcaps">Condition:</span> Incrustations,
white in color and calcareous, especially on the right side of the back
section. The internal surface of the two holes on either side of the
head is abraded, probably due to the original presence of metal
elements.

<span class="smcaps">Provenance:</span> Thomas Virzì,
Italian, 1881–1974 (Munich, Germany)[^1]; by 1994–1996, Barbara and
Lawrence Fleischman (New York, New York), donated to the J. Paul Getty
Museum, 1996.

<span class="smcaps">Bibliography: *Passion for
antiquities*</span>1994, p. 354, no. 222; “*<span
class="smcaps">Acquisitions</span>* 1996–98, p. 67.

The mask presents a rounded skullcap and two holes for hanging in the
upper section of the head. The general characteristics suggest that it
is associated with the New Comedy character *Colax*, an adulator (vain
flatterer), described by Pollux and also documented in the corpus of
theatrical masks of Lipari in five separate examples. This character has
a malevolent, ambiguous smile, an oval face with puffy cheeks, a strong
jaw, and a long, thin nose. The convex forehead features a cleft in the
central area and a frontal eminence above that. The eyes are half closed
with the upper eyelids partially lowered; the eyebrows are raised in an
arching curve; the mouth is broad and wide open, with fleshy lips; the
chin is full, with a dimple. The hair, painted red, forms a crown of
radial striations around the forehead, with a raised section in the
middle. The *Colax* masks from Lipari, found in stratigraphic contexts
associated with vases in the style of Gnathia and of the Lipari Painter,
can be dated to the first half of the third century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span>.[^2] Hypothetically, the
*Colax* mask might be attributable to the Apulian area and, though there
is no direct comparison with other Tarentine masks, it can be placed in
the larger repertory of theatrical terracottas that characterize the
local production and the funerary votive deposits of the third century
<span class="smcaps">BC.</span>[^3]

[^1]: On the Virzì Collection, see description section for cat. 4-23, n.
    1.

[^2]: On theater masks of New Comedy described in the catalogue of
    Julius Pollux, see <span class="smcaps">Bernabò
    Brea</span> 1981, pp. 133–42; for the mask of the adulator in
    particular, see pp. 189–91; <span
    class="smcaps">Webster</span> 1995, vol. 1, pp.
    22–23; see also <span class="smcaps">Bernabò
    Brea</span> 1971–74, pp. 167–80.

[^3]: For the masks in the Tarentine funerary deposits, see <span
    class="smcaps">Graepler</span> 1997, pp. 231–34.
