---
title: Altar with Animals
cat: 49
fabric: >: 
  reddish in color (Munsell 2.5 yr 7/8–7.5 yr 8/6), hard, and porous with numerous reflective and calcareous inclusions of considerable size.
condition: > 
  Gaps at the corners and in the cornices.
provenance: > 
  – 1968, Fallani (Rome, Italy); 1971, Royal Athena Galleries (New York, New York), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1971.
bibliography: >
  Selected Works 1971, no. 60; Kingsley 1976, p. 13, fig. 36.
---
The *arula*, parallelepiped in shape, is squared off with rectangular
cornices at the top and the base, above which a thin fillet serves as a
ground line for the figures. The underside was hollowed out in order to
reduce the weight and to facilitate firing. The four faces are decorated
with molded figures of animals in low relief, which were finished with a
potter’s rib.[^1] The letters ΔΙΟ (Dionysos) are inscribed on the top
surface.[^2]

On side A, a goat is depicted in a stationary stance facing left, with
front and back legs joined and firmly planted on the ground. The
animal’s head is lowered, with the muzzle pressed against its chest as
if preparing to charge the panther on the adjacent side. The goat has
delicate horns that curve back along the neck, a short upturned tail, a
prominent phallus, and fleece rendered in small, wavy locks.

On side B, a panther moves toward the right, with its left paw raised.
The body is sinuous and arched, with a well-defined attachment of the
back left leg; the long tail twists and curves upward in a sigmate
shape.

On side C, a lioness faces left with her right front paw raised. Her
body is long, narrowing at the middle, and the fur is rendered in a
stylized manner with short, flame-shaped locks; the tail and the
attachment of the back leg are similar to the preceding figure.

On side D, a griffin advances toward the right, confronting the lioness
on the adjacent side with its left front paw lifted and wings spread;
they are attached at the shoulder and defined by incised, elongated
feathers; the left (back) wing appears in profile beneath the creature’s
head. The anatomical parts are stylized, especially the long, flexing
body and the S-curved tail, which belong to the Archaic tradition.[^3]
This type of *arula*—small in size, made from a block of clay, and
decorated with animals and mythological creatures—is widespread in Magna
Graecia, especially in Metaponto,[^4] Caulonia,[^5] and Locri,[^6] and
is generally dated to the second half of the fourth century <span
class="smcaps">BC.</span> There are significant ties
between the four animals and the deity to whom the *arula* was to be
dedicated: the griffin, the panther, the lioness, and the goat, in fact,
frequently accompany Dionysos and his entourage. The association with
the griffin and the panther seems to be documented as far back as the
end of the fifth century, as documented by Apulian vases. The griffin
seems to be more closely affiliated with a type of chthonic Dionysos
that is probably of Thracian-Phrygian origin.[^7]

In Sicily, too, as early as in the Archaic period, *arulae* with
depictions of animals have been found, evidence of the early
assimilation by the colonial world of iconographic motifs from the Greek
and Eastern regions, motifs that, through the medium of vases as well,
persist over time without any particular stylistic development.
Likewise, a number of Archaic formal conventions, such as the S-shaped
tails, found also in small Laconian or Corinthian bronzes diffused in
the West, would continue to appear for a long time.[^8] The most
pertinent comparison is with a number of *arulae* from Metaponto that
present the same typology and subjects, though they are arranged in a
different order; the use of individual molds allowed a certain
decorative variety within a substantially repetitive production.[^9]

There is some debate over the origin of this type: Pierre Wuilleumier
believed it could be assigned to Tarentine production due to its
similarity to subjects found in appliqués or in imitations of gilded
terracotta costume jewelry, as well as in Apulian vases. Other scholars
believe the type could be more properly assigned to the area of
Metaponto, especially due to the quantity of pieces found in that
area.[^10]

[^1]: For this type of *arula*, see <span
    class="smcaps">Meijden</span> 1993, TI 27–34 (from
    Metaponto) and TI 35 (from Taranto), pls. 24–25, pp. 28–38, 243–44,
    datable to the second half of the fourth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC.</span>

[^2]: See the inscription dedicated to Dionysos in abbreviation and in
    the Achaean alphabet inscribed on an Attic oinochoe dating from the
    end of the sixth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>: F. G. Lo Porto,
    “Testimonianze archeologiche di culti metapontini*,*” *Xenia* 16
    (1988), pp. 5–28, fig. 17. For the abbreviated name of Dionysos in
    Taras, see <span class="smcaps">Wuilleumier</span>
    1939, pp. 394–95; *<span
    class="smcaps">Taranto</span>* 1995, pp. 181–82.

[^3]: For the depiction of the griffin, see <span
    class="smcaps">Orlandini</span> 1959, pls 29, nos.
    3–30; D. Ricciotti, *Terrecotte votive,* 1. *Arule*, Studi materiali
    dei Musei e monumenti communale di Roma, Antiquarium Comunale di
    Roma (Rome, 1978), p. 62, pl. XXXIII; C. Delplace*, Le griffon de
    l’archaïsme à l’époque impériale: Étude iconographique et essai
    d’interprétation symbolique* (Brussels, 1980), pp. 151–60.

[^4]: For Metaponto, see <span
    class="smcaps">Letta</span> 1971, pl. XXIX, nos.
    1–4 (late fourth–third century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>); <span
    class="smcaps">Lo Porto</span> 1966, p. 154, fig.
    15 (*arula* in reddish clay with the figure of a griffin and a lion,
    from Contrada Sansone).

[^5]: For Caulonia, see P. Orsi, “Caulonia,” *MonAnt* 23 (1914), fig. 58
    (from a domestic context); H. Tréziny, *Kaulonia: Sondage sur la
    fortification nord, 1982–1985* (Naples, 1989), p. 79, no. 353, figs.
    51–54. A Caulonian origin has also been proposed for the four
    miniature *arulae* found in Naxos, Sicily: see <span
    class="smcaps">Lentini</span> 1993*,* pp. 42–43.

[^6]: For Locri: <span class="smcaps">Barra Bagnasco
    1989</span>, pp. 55–60, 118–19, pl. XXVI, no. 142.

[^7]: For the association of Dionysos with the panther and the goat, see
    L. Bodson, *Hiera zōia: Contribution à l’étude de la place de
    l’animal dans la religion grecque ancienne* (Brussels, 1978), pp.
    127–28; J. R. Green, *Gnathia Pottery in the Akademisches
    Kunstmuseum Bonn* (Mainz am Rhein, 1976), pl. 6, no. 5 (*pelike*
    with a running panther, 340–330 <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>). For the links between
    Dionysos and the griffin, see <span
    class="smcaps">Woysch-Méautis</span> 1982, pp.
    84–87, and in particular at Metaponto, see <span
    class="smcaps">Tempesta</span> 2005.

[^8]: From Gela, there is an *arula* with a front panel depicting a
    griffin in deep relief, datable as early as the second half of the
    sixth century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>; see
    <span class="smcaps">Orlandini</span> 1959, pp.
    99–100, figs. 29, 30*;* see also the *arula* from Vassallaggi
    (Gela), fig. 30, no. 1a. A similar *arula* comes from Agrigento and
    is generally dated to the fourth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>; see <span
    class="smcaps">Schürmann</span> 1989, no. 373,
    fig. 65.

[^9]: Consider the comparison suggested in n. 4; there is a similar
    *arula* also in S. Lagona, *La collezione Santapaola nel Museo
    archeologico di Lentini* (Catania, 1973), pp. 107–8, no. 306, pl.
    XL.

[^10]: The hypothesis that this type originated in Metaponto was also
    supported in <span class="smcaps">Lo Porto</span>
    1966; for the presence of the cult of Dionysos in Metaponto, see
    <span class="smcaps">Tempesta</span> 2005, with
    further bibliography.
