---
title: Mask of a Satyr
cat: 58
fabric: >
   pinkish in color (Munsell 5 yr 8/4), very porous, with numerous reflective and carbonous inclusions. Polychromy: brownish red (hair and face), orange red (orbital arch and mouth), white (interior of the orbital arch, dentition, and wreath), black (eyebrows), pink (ears); and sky blue (leaves of the wreath).
condition: >
   Reassembled from about fifteen fragments, gaps on the nape of the neck, traces of repainting over the original polychromy.
provenance: >
   – 1994–1995, Barbara and Lawrence Fleischman (New York, New York), donated to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1996.
bibliography: >
   Passion for antiquities 1994, no. 291, p. 356; “Museum Acquisitions Between July 1, 1996, and June 30, 1998.” *The Report of the J. Paul Getty Trust*, 1997–1998, p. 67.
---
The mask depicts a young satyr wearing a wreath, with strongly
emphasized facial features and a stern, somewhat threatening expression.
The face is round, with a powerful jaw, full cheeks, a short, rounded
chin with a dimple in the center, and a wide-open mouth with fleshy,
prominent lips; the upper dental arch is visible. The robust nose has
enlarged nostrils and an upturned tip with two incisions, one at the
base and one in the upper part of the septum. The eyes are staring and
hollowed out with convex eyeballs and perforated irises, surrounded by
heavy, distinctly marked eyelids; the eyebrows are thick and furrowed;
the forehead has a bump in the upper portion and is furrowed by a
horizontal crease; the ears are feral and pointed. The hairstyle, which
is rendered in the back with fine incisions, rises up over the forehead,
where a voluminous wreath, decorated with six ivy leaves and two round
pieces of fruit at the center, was applied. There are two suspension
holes in the lower part of the nape of the neck.

The mask is configured as a full-fledged scale model of originals that
were worn onstage by actors.[^1] The wreath was worked by hand and
applied before firing. The polychromy, in keeping with tradition, was
used to express or emphasize the distinctive character details, such as
the red of the male complexion, the white of the eyeballs, or the black
of the eyebrows.

The mask seems to echo the general characteristics of the beardless
satyr type from New Comedy (*satyros ageneios*, or beardless satyr)
described in the *Onomastikon* by Pollux, though in this case the facial
features were interpreted with a certain creative license with respect
to the Attic prototypes.[^2] The type, however, shows notable affinities
with the masks of the so-called Vollmer Group of terracottas, according
to T. B. L. Webster’s classification, datable between the middle of the
second century <span class="smcaps">BC</span> and 50
<span class="smcaps">BC</span>; those masks are
distinguished by powerfully plastic modeling with marked chiaroscuro
effects and expressive emphasis, accentuated by staring eyes and
wide-open mouths. Examples of this group have been found in various
centers of the Aegean, southern Italy, and Sicily, but it is likely that
the type originates from Campania.

The masks related to the Vollmer Group find parallels also in the
production of Myrina and Priene: for example, a mask, possibly depicting
a parasite and dating back to the second century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span>, presents similar
characteristics. This means that, especially in the Late Hellenistic
period, distinctive elements peculiar to one type might in some cases be
transmitted to and used in other typologies as well, since the serial
production of masks had increasingly little to do with actual theatrical
performances; the iconography, therefore, tended to move toward the
generic.[^3] In Sicily, examples that could be assignable to this group
and which depict various characters from New Comedy were found in
Agrigento, San Fratello, and Centuripe.[^4]

In other centers, as well, masks have been found that refer to
characters other than the one represented by the Getty mask, but which
are comparable on the basis of stylistic peculiarities and especially
the emphasis on plasticity. At Lipari, for instance, there are a number
of small masks, datable to the first half of the third century <span
class="smcaps">BC,</span> with a convivial wreath,
large staring eyes, and round eyeballs, which exhibit the distinctive
characteristics of the group. A female mask found in Adrano is datable
by stratigraphic evidence to the third century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span> and is characterized by
powerful plastic modeling; another mask with the same characteristics at
the British Museum, possibly depicting a parasite and datable to the
second century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>, has
tentatively been assigned to Sicily.[^5] As for the possible
archaeological context, it should be emphasized that, according to the
current state of research in Sicily, in particular at Adrano and
Morgantina, the most substantial group of theatrical materials comes
from the settlement areas; in Lipari, by contrast, theatrical
terracottas are documented almost exclusively in funerary contexts. Such
is the case also at Centuripe, where, between the third and the second
century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>, masks are a
recurring feature in funerary deposits, expressing most clearly the
intimate relationship between the cult of the dead and Dionysian
rituals.[^6] Moreover, masks and statuettes of actors are attested in
the sanctuaries of Demeter and Kore, deities linked with Dionysos in
cult practices; thus one finds evidence of several cults within a single
sanctuary, in keeping with a syncretistic approach attested in the
Hellenistic period.[^7] Hypothetically, the Getty mask can be assigned
to Sicily and is most closely comparable with the production of
Centuripe in the second century <span
class="smcaps">BC.</span>[^8]

[^1]: On the use of masks in theatrical practice, see U. Albini, *Nel
    nome di Dioniso: Vita teatrale nell’Atene classica* (Milan, 1991),
    pp. 75–77. For the masks at Lipari and Centuripe, see <span
    class="smcaps">Bernabò Brea</span> 2002, pp. 9–12.

[^2]: For a description of the mask of a beardless satyr, see J. Pollux,
    *Onomastikon* 4.1.42; and L. Bernabò Brea and M. Cavalier, *Maschere
    e personaggi del teatro greco nelle terrecotte liparesi* (Rome,
    2001), p. 52, fig. 40. On local interpretations of the Attic
    prototypes in a number of centers in Sicily, such as Morgantina and
    Lipari, see <span class="smcaps">Bell</span> 1981,
    pp. 67–69.

[^3]: For an analysis of the Vollmer Group, see <span
    class="smcaps">Webster</span> 1995, vol. 1, p. 63;
    vol. 2, pp. 236–38.

[^4]: <span class="smcaps">Webster</span> 1995, vol.
    2, pp. 236–37, 3NT 2a/b, 3NT 3a/b, 3 NT 4; see also the two examples
    of *satyros ageneios,* of which one is certainly originally from
    Centuripe, in <span class="smcaps">Bernabò
    Brea</span> 2002, figs. 109*–*10, with facial features similar to
    this one. See the masks of New Comedy male characters, probably from
    Sicily, in <span
    class="smcaps">Breitenstein</span> 1941, pl. 86,
    nos. 719–20; and the theatrical mask, perhaps originally from
    Caltavuturo, in C. Angela Di Stefano, “Nuove accessioni al Museo
    Nazionale di Palermo,” *SicArch* 12 (1970), pp. 25–30, esp. p. 30,
    fig. 10.

[^5]: <span class="smcaps">Bernabò Brea</span> 1981,
    pp. 127–29, H 6; also <span class="smcaps">Burn
    and Higgins</span> 2001, no. 2246; for the female theatrical mask
    from Adrano, see G. Lamagna, “Terracotte di argomento teatrale da
    Adrano,” *SicArch* 33 (2000), pp. 221–46.

[^6]: On the function of theatrical masks at Lipari, see <span
    class="smcaps">Bernabò Brea</span> 1981, pp.
    21–27; for Centuripe, <span
    class="smcaps">Musumeci</span> 2010, pp. 104–6;
    <span class="smcaps">Webster</span> 1995, vol. 2,
    pp. 60–64; and <span class="smcaps">Bernabò
    Brea</span> 1971–74. On the presence of theatrical terracottas in
    funerary deposits, see also the finds in Taranto: <span
    class="smcaps">Graepler</span> 1997, pp. 231–34.

[^7]: In this connection, see the observations of L. Todisco, “Teatro e
    *theatra* nelle immagini e nell’edilizia monumentale della Magna
    Grecia,” in <span class="smcaps">Pugliese
    Carratelli 1990</span>*,* pp. 103–58; also J. R. Green, “Dedication
    of Masks,” *Revue Archeologique* 2 (1982), pp. 237–48. Performances
    and playful behavior must have played a major role in the practice
    of the Demeter cult; in this connection, see <span
    class="smcaps">Portale</span> 2008, pp. 33–37;
    <span class="smcaps">Hinz</span> 1998, pp. 47–48,
    229–30; and <span class="smcaps">Bell</span> 1981,
    pp. 97–98 and 67–73.

[^8]: On masks originally from Centuripe, see <span
    class="smcaps">Bernabò Brea</span> 2002, pp.
    103–6, and <span class="smcaps">Musumeci</span>
    2010, pp. 94, 100–101.
