---
title: Head of a Male Banqueter
cat: 8
fabric: >
  light orange in color (Munsell 7.5 yr 8/6), talcous, purified, with reflective inclusions.
condition: >
  The central and left-hand sections of the wreath and probably the central and right-hand rosette, the strips of cloths, and the locks of hair on the sides of the neck are fragmentary; there are diffuse incrustations on the surface.
provenance: >
  – 1982 Antike Kunst Palladion (Basel, Switzerland), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1982.
bibliography: >
  Unpublished.
---
The head, with its oval face, is tilted slightly to the right and has
pronounced cheekbones; the small eyes have downturned outer corners and
thickened eyelids; the nose is straight; the open mouth leaves the teeth
visible; the lower lip is quite prominent. The figure wears ornamental
headgear added to the head and decorated with ribbon, a wreath, probably
three rosettes, and bands falling on either side of the face and onto
the shoulders. The hair protrudes from beneath the head covering and,
leaving the ears uncovered, is arrayed on either side of the face in
wavy locks, clearly separated by incisions. In the center of the
forehead, the hair is less clearly defined and more softly brushed; two
three-dimensional ringlets dangle at the sides of the neck. The head can
be assigned to the type of the young, beardless banqueter represented in
the act of singing, found in Tarentine production from the end of the
fifth and the first half of the fourth centuries <span
class="smcaps">BC.</span>[^1] The wreath decorated
with three symmetrically arranged rosettes and sometimes topped by a
small palm tree is distinctive to the Tarentine area and can also be
found in a number of bronzes that are probably depictions of Zeus
Katabaites.[^2] The details of the fine locks of hair, the half-open
mouth, and the tilted position of the head are also found in a number of
busts and terracotta sculptures from Taranto.[^3] Music and song
constituted significant moments during the symposium, and these
iconographic elements, much like the individual attributes accompanying
the depictions of the banqueters, must have had a specific value in
various phases of the ritual, related to status and age, which
identified the banqueter in the context of the political and social
community.[^4]

[^1]: On the type of the reclining figure in general, see the
    introduction and cat. 6. See also the pieces with diadems, bands,
    and rosettes in <span class="smcaps">*Taranto*
    1995</span>, pl. VIII, no. 3; and <span
    class="smcaps">Herdejürger</span> 1982, pp. 66–67,
    no. 121. For the headgear, see also <span
    class="smcaps">Fischer-Hansen</span> 1992, p. 80,
    no. 48 (female head dating from 400–375 <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>).

[^2]: In this connection, see <span
    class="smcaps">Lippolis</span> 1982. On the wreath
    as an obligatory ornament for participants in the symposium, see P.
    G. Guzzo, “Corone d’agone tra guerra e morte in Magna Grecia,” in
    <span class="smcaps">La Regina 2003</span>, pp.
    92–101, in which the author analyzes the possible and extensive
    meanings of the wreath in the Italic context and in Magna Graecia.

[^3]: Among other possible comparisons are: C. Belli, *Il tesoro di
    Taras* (Milan, 1970), p. 208, and the head of a banqueter in the
    Musei Civici di Trieste, in <span
    class="smcaps">Poli</span> 2010, cat. 452 (last
    decades of the fourth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>); see also a terracotta
    head in Berlin with an open mouth, previously linked to the figure
    of Orpheus*,* in <span class="smcaps">Bulle</span>
    1939, pp. 3–19, no. 15.

[^4]: On the role of music and singing in the ritual of the funerary
    banquet, see the “Orpheus group,” cat. 1–3, n. 29; F. Lissarrague,
    *The Aesthetics of the Greek Banquet: Images of Wine and Ritual*
    (Princeton, 1990), pp. 123–39; G. Lambin*, La chanson grecque dans
    l’antiquité* (Paris, 1992), pp. 216–19; D. Musti, “Musica greca tra
    aristocrazia e democrazia,” in A. C. Cassio, D. Musti, and L. E.
    Rossi, eds., *Synaulía: Cultura musicale in Grecia e contatti
    mediterranei*, AION Quaderni 5 (Naples, 2000) pp. 7–55; and *<span
    class="smcaps">Taranto</span>* 1995, pp. 51–53.
