---
title: Bust of a Woman
cat: 15
fabric: >
  Pinkish beige color (Munsell 7.5 yr 8/3), lighter in at a few points, porous, with a friable consistency and micaceous inclusions; the surface is covered with a thick slip of diluted clay.
condition: >
  The head and the attachment of the right shoulder are preserved, along with the edge of a dress at the shoulder; there are various incrustations over the entire surface.
provenance: >
  1982, Antike Kunst Palladion (Basel, Switzerland), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1982.
bibliography: >
  Unpublished.
---
The head, which must have belonged to a bust or statue, is set on a
massive neck marked by a single “Venus ring.” The face is broad, with a
rounded chin and full cheeks, almond-shaped eyes with heavy eyelids,
well-defined eyebrows, a straight nose, and a slightly open mouth with
fleshy lips and a more prominent lower lip. The hair is drawn up under a
*sakkos* (hair covering) with a banded edge and emerges on either side
of the face in thick, wavy locks that bulge outward, leaving the
earlobes visible. The figure is probably dressed in a chiton fastened at
the shoulder by a round button. On the top of the head, corresponding to
the button of the *sakkos*, we can see a hole marked by radial
incisions.

This type is well attested in Tarentine coroplastic art and can be dated
between the end of the fifth and the first half of the fourth century
BC<span class="smcaps">.</span>[^1] The traits it
displays—a big face with a rounded jaw, small nose, mouth with sinuous
lips, all largely derived from Attic Classical prototypes—are also found
in the local sculptural tradition.[^2] Even the type of hairstyle is
influenced by echoes of the post-Phidian school, which influenced not
only the plastic arts but also a number of coin types in Magna Graecia,
such as the female head found on staters from Terina after 420 BC<span
class="smcaps">.</span>[^3]

[^1]: There are some unpublished comparisons from *favissa* 6 of Saturo
    (crate 1290), in particular a statue head with a *sakkos* featuring
    the same radial detail indicating the folds around the button on top
    of the head covering; see also a piece in <span
    class="smcaps">Herdejürger</span> 1982, p. 65, no.
    120 (dated 375–350 <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>); <span
    class="smcaps">Iacobone</span> 1988, pl. 128 d*,*
    p. 135, dating from the middle of the fourth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC.</span> Further, a small female
    bust is reminiscent of the head in terms of hairstyle and heavy
    facial features: <span class="smcaps">Letta</span>
    1971*,* pl. XV, no. 1, p. 93–95; see also <span
    class="smcaps">Higgins</span> 1954, pl. 175 (late
    fifth century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>);
    <span class="smcaps">Fischer-Hansen</span> 1992,
    no. 54, p. 84, as the beginning of the fourth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC.</span> For the type of chiton
    closed by “buttons,” see <span
    class="smcaps">D’Ercole</span> 1990, p. 95, pl.
    33b.

[^2]: On the Attic influence in Tarentine sculpture between the fifth
    and fourth century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>,
    see the previous entry and <span
    class="smcaps">Belli Pasqua</span> 1995, pp. 5–6;
    and for a female marble head of the fourth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC,</span> pp. 70–71. This female
    type could be reminiscent of Phidian models, such as the head of the
    “Kore Albani,” known only in copies dated to 440 <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span> on the basis of
    comparison with a similar figure in the South Metope XIX of the
    Parthenon: <span class="smcaps">La Rocca</span>*,*
    1985, fig. 6. See also, for this type of face and hairstyle, the
    head from the Athenian Agora (Agora S2354): <span
    class="smcaps">Boardman</span> 1985, fig. 105.

[^3]: For the coin types, see A. Stazio, “Monete e scambio,” in <span
    class="smcaps">Pugliese Carratelli 1983</span>, p.
    164, figs. 139–42. For the hairstyle with *sakkos* and separate
    locks of hair on the forehead, there are also some comparisons in
    red-figured Attic vases, i.e., the female bust that decorates one
    extremity of the *epinetron* (thigh protector worn while weaving) of
    Eretria (425 <span class="smcaps">BC</span>): see
    R. Kousser, “The World of Aphrodite in the Late Fifth Century in
    Greek Vases,” in C. Marconi, ed., *Greek Vases: Images, Contexts and
    Controversies,* Columbia Studies in the Classical Tradition 25
    (Boston, 2004), pp. 97–112.
