---
title: Bust of a Woman
cat: 16
fabric: >
  Pale pinkish beige (Munsell 7.5 yr 8/4), with a friable consistency and a high content of small calcareous and micaceous inclusions. 
condition: >
  The head, neck, and attachment of the shoulders are preserved. The surface is covered with a thick layer of incrustation.
provenance: >
  – 1982, Antike Kunst Palladion (Basel, Switzerland), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1982.
bibliography: >
  Unpublished.
---
The head, which belonged to a bust or a statue, features an elongated
oval face with lowered superciliary arches. The eyes are asymmetrical
and the eyelids are lowered; the upper rims of the eyelids in particular
are notably thickened. The nose is straight, the mouth small and
slightly open, with a fleshy lower lip. The hair pushes out from beneath
the *sakkos*, which has a button on top marked by a raised edge along
the forehead; the hair is arranged alongside the face in puffy locks,
rendered by means of deep incisions. The figure wears spherical globular
earrings.

This piece is comparable to a bust of a banqueter from the votive
deposit of the Via di Palma in Taranto dating to the second half of the
fifth century <span class="smcaps">BC.</span>[^1] In
particular, the stylization of the locks of hair and the sharply lined
eyelids are recurring elements in the Tarentine coroplastic art, as are
the lowered gaze and the expression of melancholy found in local plastic
art from the end of the fifth century to the first half of the fourth
century <span class="smcaps">BC.</span>[^2] The
spherical earrings are quite common, as is the *sakkos* with a high
edge, which is found on some heads of statues found in the *favissae* of
Saturo.[^3]

[^1]: See <span class="smcaps">Iacobone</span> 1988,
    pls. 89a–b, p. 93, pertaining to a male bust and attesting to a
    workshop practice that allowed artisans to adapt a single type of
    head to both male and female figures; see also <span
    class="smcaps">Besques</span> 1954, pl. XCIV,
    C362, from the end of the fifth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>.

[^2]: See the terracotta head from Taranto discussed by W.
    Lambrinoudakis, s.v. “Apollon,” *LIMC* 2 (1984), p. 256, no. 580,
    dating to the mid-fifth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC.</span> See also the male bronze
    statuette in P. Kranz, “Ein Zeugnis lokrischer Toreutik im Cleveland
    Museum of Art,” *RM* 85 (1978**)**, pp. 209–55, no. 143, figs. 101,
    no. 1, and 107, no. 1, especially for the rendering of the locks of
    hair around the forehead, the structure of face, and facial
    features; also <span
    class="smcaps">Herdejürgen</span> 1978*,* p. 34,
    A. 25, and the statuette of a banqueter from the late fifth century
    BC in <span class="smcaps">Herdejürger</span>
    1982, no. 107, pp. 48–49. For the marked eyebrows, see ibid., no.
    106, from the end of the fifth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC.</span> See also the head from
    420–400 <span class="smcaps">BC</span>, possibly
    from Taranto, in U. Gehrig, *Antiken aus Berliner Privatbesitz*,
    exh. cat. (Berlin, Antikenmuseum, 1975), no. 273. For the linear
    rendering of the hairstyle, compare also nos. 9 and 10 in this
    catalogue, as well as the head, probably from Taranto and dating
    from the same chronological range, in C. Vermeule*, Greek, Etruscan
    and Roman Art: The Classical Collections of the Museum of Fine Arts*
    (Boston, 1963), fig. 11.

[^3]: For instance, in <span
    class="smcaps">Fischer-Hansen</span> 1992, nos.
    54, 56, 58, 60. A head with *sakkos* with hair emerging more freely
    from the headgear comes from *favissa* 6 in Saturo (crate 1299).
