---
title: Statuette of a Standing Woman
cat: 43
fabric: >
  Orange in color (Munsell 7.5 yr 7/4), friable and fairly well purified, with small reflective inclusions; extensive traces of polychromy over a thick layer of white ground: brownish red (hair), pink (complexion, himation, and chiton), light blue (leaves of the wreath), and red (mouth).<sup id="fnref:1"><a href="#fn:1" class="footnote">1</a></sup> The body and head were made with two bivalve molds. There are two small holes on the shoulder and an oval-shaped hole in the back.<sup id="fnref:2"><a href="#fn:2" class="footnote">2</a></sup>
condition: >
  The base was restored with pink mastic, the polychromy is worn away, and there are a number of blackish stains on the surface.
provenance: >
  1981, Robert Blaugrund (Los Angeles, California), donated to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1981.
bibliography: >
  Unpublished.
---
The statuette depicts a draped female figure in a standing position,
resting her weight on the left leg, while the right leg is bent and
drawn back. The left arm is folded against the side while the right hand
holds the himation in the front. The himation completely envelops the
body, with a fold that drapes over the left shoulder. On the lower part
of the body, beneath the cloak, is the pink chiton with heavy, ample
folds. The oval face is painted pink, with regular facial features; the
lips of the small mouth preserve traces of red pigment. Parted in the
middle, the hair is combed to either side in wavy locks that form a
chignon at the nape of the neck; atop the head is a diadem and wreath of
ivy leaves. The small eyes turn downward; the figure wears spherical
earrings.

The statuette is a product of Canosa from the end of the fourth century
<span class="smcaps">BC</span> to the beginning or the
third century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>, based on
numerous statuettes from this Daunian center with comparable typology,
fabric, and polychromy. The figure echoes a type, inspired by the
production of Tanagra, with a characteristic ivy wreath, which can be
traced back to a Dionysian model; the arrangement of the himation
gathered in the front was a widespread motif in Taranto, and recurs also
in various examples from Campania.<sup id="fnref:3"><a href="#fn:3" class="footnote">3</a></sup> Standing draped female statuettes
were also utilized as attachments on large polychrome vases with plastic
decoration made in Canosa, datable between the end of the fourth century
and the beginning of the third century <span
class="smcaps">BC.</span><sup id="fnref:4"><a href="#fn:4" class="footnote">4</a></sup>

<br />

#### Notes

<div class="footnotes">
  <ol>
    <li id="fn:1" class="">
      <p>The undercoat for the polychromy, as found in other examples, is
          made of unfired kaolinite; see F. Van der Wielen-van Ommeren, “La
          céramique hellénistique de Canosa: Techniques de fabrication,” in
          <em>Proceedings of the Third Symposium on Ancient Greek and Related
          Pottery, Copenhagen, August 31–September 4, 1987</em> (Copenhagen,
          1988), pp. 665–73.<a href="#fnref:1" class="reversefootnote">↩</a></p>
    </li>
    <li id="fn:2">
      <p>For the presence of holes on the shoulders, see the example in
          <span class="smcaps"><em>Ceramiques antiques</em>
          1987,</span> no. 107, said to be for the insertion of small metal
          ornaments.<a href="#fnref:2" class="reversefootnote">↩</a></p>
    </li>
    <li id="fn:3">
      <p>For the presence of the Tanagra repertoire in Canosa, see V. Jeammet, “Entre tradition grecque et indigène: Canosa,” in <span class="smcaps">Jeammet 2003</span>b, pp. 290–91. See also the statuettes from Canosa in <span class="smcaps"><em>Ceramiques antiques</em> 1987,</span> nos. 139, 144, and 145, and from Taranto in <span class="smcaps">Besques</span> 1986, pl. 24e, datable to the beginning of the third century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>, with the spool base typical of Tarentine production. Also see the statuette, from the third quarter of the third century <span class="smcaps">BC,</span> from the funerary deposit of a tomb on the Via Tito Livio, in A. dell’Aglio and D. Graepler, “Découverte d’une tombe à Tarente,” in <span class="smcaps">Jeammet 2003</span>b*,* pp. 285–89, no. 226. See also a small draped female figure from Cuma from the second half of the fourth to the first half of the third century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>, in <span class="smcaps">Bonghi Jovino</span> 1990, pp. 65–96, pl. I, nos. 1–3, a type also found at Minturno and at Capua.<a href="#fnref:2" class="reversefootnote">↩</a></p>
    </li>
    <li id="fn:4">
      <p>See F. van der Wielen, “Ceramica a decorazione plastica e policroma,”
      in <span class="smcaps">Cassano</span> 1992, pp. 310–21.<a href="#fnref:2" class="reversefootnote">↩</a></p>
    </li>
  </ol>
</div>
