---
title: Pair of Altars with the Myth of Adonis
cat: 47
fabric: >
  Reddish in color (Munsell 10 r 6/6–8/6) with numerous micaceous, sandy, carbonous, and calcareous inclusions of medium and large sizes; the clay is gray at the core. Pigments were applied over a layer of yellowish diluted clay and white slip.
  Cat. 47: sporadic traces of red (hair of the figure on the left), reddish brown (drapery of the same figure), and green pigment (musical instrument of the figure in the middle and drapery of the figure on the right).
  H: 41.8 cm; W (base): 34.2 cm; D (base): 29.2 cm; W (top): 31.6 cm; D (top): 27 cm; W (hollow): 2 cm; D (hollow): 1.6 cm
  Cat. 48: red (hair of the seated male figure in the center and of the female figure seated on the *cista*), and green pigment (drapery of the seated female figure in the middle).
  H: 41.8 cm; W (base): 33.4 cm; D (base): 28.8 cm; W (top): 31.5 cm; D (top): 27.8 cm; W (hollow): 1.7 cm; D (hollow): 2.7 cm
condition: >
  The altars were reassembled from numerous fragments, and the polychromy is almost entirely worn away. Before acquisition, they were probably subjected to an excessively aggressive cleaning that abraded the surface at several points. Nevertheless, large areas of a pale slip remain, over which traces of pigments can be seen. Slight amounts of soil/carbonate incrustations are also visible, especially in folds and details of the figures.
provenance: >
  by 1984–1986, Robin Symes (London, England), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1986.
bibliography: >
  <em>Acquisitions</em> 1986, p. 160, no. 6; <span class="smcaps">Getty</span> 1991, p. 40; S. Settis, “Idea dell’arte greca d’Occidente fra otto e novecento: Germania e Italia,” in <span class="smcaps">Settis</span> 1994, pp. 855–902, esp. pp. 893, 896, figs. 20–21; <span class="smcaps">Getty</span> 1997, p. 42; E. Towne Marcus, *Masterpieces of the J. Paul Getty Museum: Antiquities* (Los Angeles, 1997), pp. 84–85; <span class="smcaps">Getty</span> 2001, pp. 42–43; <span class="smcaps">Salapata</span> 2001; <span class="smcaps">Getty</span> 2002, p. 115; D. Sacks, <em>Encyclopedia of the Ancient Greek World</em> (New York, 2005) p. 6, illus. <span class="smcaps">Getty</span> 2010, p. 113; <span class="smcaps">Getty</span> 2015, p. 23.
---
Due to their distinctive formal and iconographic features, this pair of
altars (*arulae*) constitutes a document of extreme importance for our
understanding of the cult of Adonis in Magna Graecia.

With a rectangular shape and walls tapering inward toward the top, each
altar consists of five terracotta slabs assembled using *barbotine* (a
liquid binder of clay and water) before firing. On all four sides, the
lower and upper cornices have an egg and dart molding, made by a
cylinder mold.[^1] The altars are hollow with a reinforcing partition
wall on the interior; small pieces of clay were added by the coroplast
to reinforce the suture points. Vertical striations are visible over
most of the surface where a tool was scraped over the surface to smooth
it. There are many evident tool marks, including striations running
horizontally across the inside, and the interiors show signs of being
pressed and worked with hands; fingerprints are visible in several
areas.[^2] The main side of each altar is decorated with mold-made
reliefs, depicting two related scenes. There the coroplast intervened
with handwork on the drapery and the hair, refining the details with a
potter’s rib, and completed the decoration with polychrome pigments. A
hollow with a rectangular cross section breaks the cornice, opening in
the middle of the inside upper edge of each altar. Especially on cat.
48, a groove and a darker stain can be seen along the interior wall,
probably left by a liquid that ran into it. A hypothesis has been put
forth that the hollows used to contain pins that joined the two altars,
thus making the two a unified composition not only iconographically but
also structurally.[^3] On the upper surface, a cover—probably metal—must
have been provided to protect the surface from fire, as demonstrated by
the regular shape of the silhouette that is visible in infrared
photographs, corresponding to the area that was protected from
combustion.

This type of altar is not especially widespread but is attested in Magna
Graecia and in Sicily. It could have been used for small votive
offerings or, as is likely here, to burn perfumes and incense.[^4]

On cat. 47, three female figures, depicted with their faces in profile
and their bodies in three-quarter view, walk rapidly to the right over
rocky ground; the terrain is rendered by protuberances defined through
light incisions. The hands of the outer women clasp the other about her
shoulders as they move in apparent procession toward the group depicted
on cat. 48. Each figure, characterized by a rapt expression, is wearing
a *peplos* that shows the form of the body beneath in a fluid interplay
of folds that are ruffled at the ends. The woman in the middle has a
*sakkos* on her head and she carries an eleven-part sistrum (percussion
instrument) with both hands, while her companion on the right is holding
a tympanon (drum) with her left hand.[^5] The hair of the flanking
figures is short and curly, and they all wear hoop earrings with
pendants.[^6]

On cat. 48, a male with a youthful and effeminate appearance, turned in
a three-quarter view, is seated on a rock with his legs crossed. A
himation is wrapped around the legs and, leaving the torso uncovered,
covers his head like a veil with a ruffled edge. The long curly hair is
held back by a *mitra* (a Near Eastern headband) and extends over the
shoulders.[^7] With his left hand he pulls the hem of the himation away
from his face; with the right hand, he embraces the female figure seated
next to him, who is depicted with torso turned frontally and ankles
crossed. This figure turns her head toward the youth and wraps her left
arm around his torso; her right arm is laid on her right thigh, and she
is shod in sandals. Her flame-shaped locks of hair are gathered in a
*lampadion* (knot) atop her head and curl alongside her face, in
accordance with a fashion attested from the end of the fifth century
<span class="smcaps">BC</span>, but already documented
before then.[^8] On either side of this pair are two female characters:
the woman on the left, shown standing behind the rocky platform, turns
toward the couple; her left hand touches her head in a gesture of grief,
while her right arm drops along the side of her body, her right hand
holding a tympanon. She has the same hairstyle as two of the figures on
cat. 47, but she wears a veil with a ruffled edge that drapes over her
shoulders; her left breast is uncovered. In the foreground at right is a
female figure shown in profile, seated upon a *cista* with side
openings. Grasping her right knee with both hands, her head is bowed and
her expression is doleful. She wears a chiton that drapes in flowing
folds, and her hair is gathered in a *sphendone* (headband)*.*

The scenes depicted on the two altars summarize crucial moments of the
myth of Adonis.[^9] According to Apollodorus, who derived his account
from Panyassis, Adonis was born of an incestuous love between the
Assyrian king Theias and his daughter Myrrha; Aphrodite was smitten by
the infant Adonis’s great beauty and hid him in a box (*cista)*, which
she entrusted to Persephone. When Persephone opened the box, she too
fell in love with the beautiful infant and decided not to give him back
to Aphrodite. Zeus interceded in the quarrel between the two goddesses
and ordered that Adonis should spend a third of the year with Aphrodite,
a third with Persephone and the last third wherever he liked—but Adonis
chose to devote that time to Aphrodite as well.[^10]

Well attested in the Near East, and in particular in Byblos, the cult of
Adonis was brought to Greece as early as the Archaic period, probably
through the Phoenician colonies and Cyprus, a major crossroads for
cultural exchange between the Near East and the Greek world.[^11] From
Greece, the cult spread throughout the West, especially to Etruria,
which was sensitive to Eastern models, and to Magna Graecia. There the
myth and the festivities linked to it underwent substantial modification
within the context of existing political and religious institutions and
in relation to specific cult requirements.[^12]

The first figurative evidence of the myth dates back only to the first
half of the fifth century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>; images of it can be found in a number of *pinakes* (votive tablets) from Locri and from Francavilla
di Sicilia and, more widespread, in Attic and Apulian vases of the late
fifth century and early fourth century <span class="smcaps">BC.</span>[^13] In Etruria, scenes of the myth of Adonis decorate bronze mirrors; a terracotta urn with a dying Adonis, datable to the third century <span class="smcaps">BC,</span> comes from Tuscania.[^14]

Despite its relatively abundant iconographic and literary documentation,
there is very scant archaeological evidence of the cult of Adonis. Hence
the excavations conducted in the Etruscan sanctuary at Gravisca,
identified as an *Adonion*, are of great interest,[^15] as are the
excavations undertaken in the so-called Casa dei Leoni in Locri, where
the public cult of Aphrodite was supplanted in the fourth century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span> by the cult of Adonis.[^16]

On the Getty altars, according to this hypothesis, the male figure in
cat. 48 rendered with a hint of languid sensuality is Adonis. He is
shown embracing Aphrodite, in keeping with the scheme of the *hieros
gamos* (marriage between deities)*,* in an epiphanic projection intended
as the hypostasis of the nuptial union, though his veiled head and the
gesture of touching the himation hem are fairly uncommon and seem to
underscore the effeminate nature of the deity.[^17] The couple enveloped
in an air of amorous complicity is in any case a recurrent image in the
Attic milieu of the end of the fifth century <span
class="smcaps">BC;</span>[^18] it is also found in the
depiction of the *hieros gamos* between Dionysos and Ariadne, who are
shown seated on a rocky base on the bronze krater with Dionysian scenes
from Tomb B of Derveni in Macedonia, datable between the mid-fourth
century and 330 <span class="smcaps">BC</span>, which
follows an Attic prototype, perhaps pictorial, of the fifth century
<span class="smcaps">BC.</span>[^19]

In this context, to maintain narrative consistency, the woman in the
foreground, seated on the *cista* inside which Aphrodite supposedly
concealed Adonis, can hypothetically be identified as Persephone.
Depicted in a melancholy posture that enhances the expressive intensity
of the entire narrative, she also endows the scene with the sense of
“fleeting life” that characterizes the myth of Adonis. Persephone is
often associated with a *cista*, an iconographic attribute appropriate
to this context of union and separation.[^20] The *cista*, a distinctive
element of the female world and an integral part of a bride’s trousseau,
takes on a powerful symbolic value in this scene by alluding to the sad
fate of Adonis. Its conceptual relevance made it a privileged
iconographic motif that recurs in many depictions of the myth.

The ideological and cultic nodes that link Persephone and Aphrodite are
especially close in reference to the sphere of marriage and rites of
passage, and it is natural that, in the context of Adonis, the goddess
of the Underworld would be physically present.[^21] The episode of the
feud between Aphrodite and Persephone is clearly illustrated also on
Apulian amphora from Gorgoglione (Basilicata) and on an Apulian *pelike*
from Canosa, dating from the mid-fourth century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span>, in the Collezione
Santangelo. According to Mario Torelli, the depiction of the squabble
between the two deities can be explained in terms of the process of
assimilation of the Eastern myth by the Greeks and, in particular, by
the Western Greek colonies. The *anodos* (ascent), the return to life,
the *hieros gamos,* and Adonis’s stay in Hades, in the cyclical
progression of events, offered a customary scheme in Greek mythology
that was easily adaptable to situations and elements in Greek
culture.[^22]

On the left side of cat. 48, the female figure, along with the rock
motif, might constitute the visual link between the two altars. Having
already come into the presence of the divine couple as the three other
figures continue to hasten forward, this figure manifests profound
grief, with her hand on her head and her garments in disarray. As
attested also by the literary sources, lamentations and scenes of grief
were an integral part of the Adonic rite.[^23] The ritual also called
for the display of an *eidolon* (image of an idol) representing Adonis
and the preparation of a little garden (*kepos)* of short-lived,
aromatic plants placed on the roofs of houses, so that with the heat of
summer they might flourish and then rapidly wither, alluding to the
death of the god and the brevity of life itself.[^24] The *kepos* was
acknowledged as a *thalamos*, that is, the site of the *hieros gamos*
between Aphrodite and Adonis, but also a space in which to display the
image of the body of the young god amid vegetation, albeit now
desiccated. The rite was prevalently nocturnal,[^25] and had widespread,
intense participation, including banquets, singing, and dancing to the
music of flutes, *krotales* (cymbals), and tympana. Joyful exaltation
accompanied grief, and the *hieros gamos*, the death, and the ritual
burial of the god were commemorated, at times with loud laments and
violent gesticulations, at times with manifestations of giddy
rejoicing.[^26]

The character next to the divine couple, quite similar to the first
moving figure on cat. 47, might therefore be a female worshiper of
Adonis witnessing the sacred wedding, a tragic prelude to the young
god’s death, and bemoaning with intense mimetic force his sad fate,
which is underscored by the dramatic opposition between life and death.

The three women on cat. 47, who are moving rapidly to the right, are
characterized as a unified group and seem to be taking direct part in
the event depicted on cat. 48, integrating themselves and converging
ideally toward it with a tightly coordinated rhythmic concatenation.
Together, the scenes depicted on the two altars seem to constitute a
sacred representation of events, compressed spatially and temporally in
order to synthesize and accentuate a number of significant moments in
the rite.[^27]

The open-air setting of this scene, suggested by the rocky outcrops on
which the figures stand and sit, and the musical instruments that they
carry, such as the tympanon and sistrum, suggest the context of the
*adonia,* understood as a collective female celebration within which
orgiastic music, dance, and banqueting must have constituted essential
components. The female figures of cat. 47 constitute a *choros* and,
leaning on one another with their arms around each other’s shoulders,
they seem to proceed in a rhythmic step, evoking a ritual dance with a
strong eschatological valence.[^28]

Despite the absence of a reliable archaeological context for the altars,
the distinctive characteristics of the clay that they were made in
Medma, a center of coroplastic production known not only for a large
series of votive terracottas, but also for a group of *arulae*,
decorated with subjects taken from Attic tragedies, which have stylistic
affinities with the Getty’s pair of altars.[^29] It is significant,
therefore, that in Locri Epizephyrii, the mother colony of Medma,
archaeological evidence of a cult of Adonis has emerged, which is
reliably dated to the middle of the fourth century <span
class="smcaps">BC.</span>[^30] As previously noted,
Syracuse may well have played a fundamental role in the importation of
the Adonis cult to Locri, given the strong political and cultural ties
between the two cities dating back as far as the reign of the
Deinomenids.[^31]

Although the debate over the characteristics of Italiote artistic
production—outside influences versus originality—remains largely open,
there can be no question that between the end of the fifth century and
the beginning of the fourth century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span> Syracuse became a special
point of reference for the diffusion of new trends in the visuals arts.
Attic style, and in particular post-Phidian mannerism, prevailed there
through an intense exchange of models, developed and consolidated in
continuity with earlier traditions.[^32]

The reliance upon Attic models is also clearly evident in the style of
these altars, especially in the rendering of the solid organic forms
(despite occasional incongruities) and in the definition of a spatially
balanced composition. The coroplast succeeded in suggesting a depth of
field by arranging the figures on different planes, in part through the
rocky landscape, a contrivance that clearly points to influence from
developments in contemporary painting.[^33] The formal rendering also
exhibits a taste for motion and chiaroscuro, accentuated by the
fluttering draperies and the figures’ hairstyles, which lends a fluid
dynamism to the overall composition and enhances its pictorial
effect.[^34] These stylistic characteristics hark back to the same Attic
context of the late fifth century <span
class="smcaps">BC</span>, and to certain tastes that
emerged in various artistic milieus. The latter were interpreted with
great originality by the first generation of Sicilian and Apulian
vase-painters, influenced by Athenian artists, and by the coroplasts and
master die-engravers of Magna Graecia.[^35]

The translation of Attic exempla into the coroplastic production of
Medma has been recognized both in the aforementioned *arulae* from Medma
decorated with subjects taken from Attic tragedies, and in a head
possibly depicting the nymph Medma and datable to the same period, now
in the Musée d’Art et d’Histoire in Geneva. The compactness of form,
enlivened by vibrant, vivid surfaces, as well as the fullness and
fleshiness of the faces, found in the Geneva head, suggest the
prevalence of a sophisticated workshop tradition.[^36] Contacts between
Medma and Athens may be related to the diplomatic mission of the
Athenian ambassador Phaeax during that city’s ill-fated expedition to
Sicily, as previously conjectured by Salvatore Settis through a careful
reconstruction of the historical events.[^37] On the other hand, the
mother colony of Locri Epizephyrii, through Syracusan mediation, may
have played a role in transmitting artistic or religious traditions. It
is difficult to determine with any certainty which scenario prevailed,
but the current state of research suggests that the distinctive Attic
imprint only partially influenced the production of Locri in the field
of coroplastic art.[^38] Taken together, the evidence suggests that the
altars date between the end of the fifth and the beginning of the fourth
century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>, and may come
from the Medma area, possibly from a funerary context; such a context is
attested for the previously mentioned Medma *arulae* and is also
suggested by the state of preservation, though the altars may not
originally have been intended for a tomb. It is more reasonable to
suppose that the altars were conceived as an iconographical and
structural pair that would have been used during the rituals of the
*adonia*, as suggested by the traces on the upper edge left by a tray
that protected the surface from fire.[^39] In any case, they can be
considered an expression of that cultural and political context in the
area of Medma, which for a brief period between the fifth and fourth
century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>, was marked by
an Athenian presence.

<br />

#### Notes

[^1]: For similar examples in terracotta, see the cornice of a
    fifth-century BC *arula* from Gela: P. Orsi, “Gela: Scavi del
    1900–1905,” *MonAnt* 17 (1906), fig. 217; the motif of the egg,
    dart, and tongue pattern is notably also on the *arula* from
    Crotone: see L. La Rocca, “Arule e ceramiche a rilievo di produzione
    crotoniate,” in R. Belli Pasqua and R. Spadea, eds., *Kroton e il
    suo territorio tra VI e V secolo a.C.:* *Aggiornamenti e nuove
    ricerche: Atti del Convegno di studi, Crotone, 3–5 Marzo 2000*
    (Crotone, 2005), pp. 43–52, pls. XVI–XVII; also dating from the
    fifth century <span class="smcaps">BC</span> are
    two fragments of acroteria, respectively from Metaponto and
    Caulonia, in E. Douglas Van Buren, *Archaic Fictile Revetments in
    Sicily and Magna Graecia* (Washington, 1973), pl. XVII, figs. 69–70.
    See also the cornices of an Archaic *arula* from Naxos in <span
    class="smcaps">Lentini</span> 1993, pp. 99–100, and from Himera, in <span class="smcaps">Belvedere</span> 1982, pl. XXV, no. 1.

[^2]: For the system of fabricating *arulae*, see <span
    class="smcaps">Meijden</span> 1993, pp. 10–11;
    <span class="smcaps">Belvedere</span> 1982, pp.
    61–67; D. Ricciotti, *Antiquarium Comunale di Roma: Terrecotte
    votive,* 1. *Arule* (Rome, 1978), pp. 8–13.

[^3]: According to Salapata, because the hollows actually damaged the
    cornice, they must have been made later: <span
    class="smcaps">Salapata</span> 2001, esp. p. 25.

[^4]: For similarly sized altars, see the examples from Medma dating to
    the end of the fifth century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>; these come from funerary contexts and depict scenes from Attic tragedies: M. Paoletti, “Arule
    di Medma e tragedie attiche,” <span class="smcaps">*Aparchai*</span> 1982, vol. 1, pp. 372–92. Also likely from Medma, but dating from the Archaic period, is a fragment of an *arula* with *korai* and Ionic capitals: see
    <span class="smcaps">Miller Ammerman</span> 1985, p. 10. Compare also with the altars from Locri and Selinunte: C. Yavis, *Greek Altars: Origins and Typology* (St. Louis, 1949), pp. 170–71, 174; the three *arulae*, of substantial size, from the emporium of Gela datable to the first quarter of the fifth century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>, in R. Panvini*,
    Tiranni e culti della Sicilia in età arcaica,* exh. cat. (Siracusa,
    Palazzo Bellomo, 2001). See also the *arulae* from Himera originally
    from domestic settings, in <span class="smcaps">Belvedere</span> 1982, pp. 103–6. Although mentioned in literary sources, pairs of *arulae* or altars
    are only rarely found: of note are two terracotta *arulae* found
    together in a domestic setting in Locri: M. Barra Bagnasco, “Aspetti
    di religiosità domestica a Locri Epizefiri,” in <span class="smcaps">*Santuari della Magna Grecia in Calabria*</span> 1996, pp. 81–88. Also from Himera are two *arulae* of the same shape and size, datable to 430–409 <span
    class="smcaps">BC: Belvedere</span> 1982, pp. 80–81,
    pl. XIV. On the presence of a tray on the top surface, often
    corresponding with a depression, see D. W. Rupp, “Greek Altars of
    the Northeastern Peloponnese, ca. 750/725 <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span> to ca. 300/275 <span
    class="smcaps">BC,</span>” Ph.D. diss., Bryn Mawr
    College (1974), p. 502.

[^5]: The sistrum held by women in Apulian iconography of the fourth
    century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>, frequently
    present in wedding and funeral contexts, was a musical instrument
    consisting of a series of horizontal elements, probably with metal
    cores, that were joined by vertical crosspieces. The sistrum
    produced sound either through percussion or shaking. The type shown
    here is more rarely seen and smaller in size than the examples
    depicted on Apulian vases; its horizontal and vertical elements
    terminate in small spheres. The horizontal elements were of varying
    thickness, which produced sounds of higher or lower pitch. On the
    origins, structure, and depiction of the sistrum, see L. Lepore, “Il
    sistro italico strumento, attributo, oggetto di culto,” *Imago
    Musicae* 8 (1991), pp. 95–108; H. R. W. Smith, *Funerary Symbolism
    in Apulian Vase Painting* (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1976), pp.
    126–32.

[^6]: The typology of the earring with a circular silhouette with
    pendant is fairly common in Magna Graecia; see P. G. Guzzo,
    *Oreficerie della Magna Grecia* (Taranto, 1993), p. 247.

[^7]: The *mitra* was also often worn by the wine god Dionysos or the
    mythical boatman Phaon, and is a recurrent element in the
    iconography of deities involved in erotic scenes or scenes of
    passion; in this connection, see <span
    class="smcaps">Cassimatis</span> 1987. In fact,
    the iconography of Adonis between the fifth century and the fourth
    century <span class="smcaps">BC</span> is in many
    ways similar to that of Dionysos and other young lovers of
    Aphrodite: they are characterized by an effeminate appearance with
    flowing hair and are depicted in languid sitting poses. See C.
    Gasparri, s.v. “Dionysos,” *LIMC* 3 (1986), p. 414, nos. 743–45; and
    L. Burn, “A Dinoid Volute-Krater by the Meleager Painter: An Attic
    Vase in the South Italian Manner,” *Greek Vases in the J. Paul Getty
    Museum*, Occasional Papers on Antiquities 5 (1992), p. 118, fig.
    7b–c. For the iconography of Adonis in the late fifth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>, see also J. Reed, “The
    Sexuality of Adonis,” *ClAnt* 14 (1995), pp. 342–46. For the
    position of Adonis, see also the figures of Herakles seated before
    an altar on a stater from Crotone, datable to 420–390 <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>, which recalls an image
    of Dionysos painted by the Karneia Painter in the late fifth century
    <span class="smcaps">BC</span>: see R. Ross
    Holloway, *Art and Coinage in Magna Graecia* (Bellinzona, 1978), pp.
    88, 138. On the gesture of the hand on the shoulder as an indication
    of possession and consummated union, and open to interpretation in a
    nuptial context, see M. Baggio, *I gesti della seduzione: Tracce di
    comunicazione non verbale nella ceramica greca tra VI e IV secolo
    a.C.* (Rome, 2004), pp. 203–10.

[^8]: The *lampadion* hairstyle has, in general, been dated to the
    beginning of the fourth century, but in Sicily it can also be found
    in coroplastic material assigned to the last years of the fifth
    century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>; in this
    connection, see <span
    class="smcaps">Spagnolo</span> 2000.

[^9]: For a bibliography on the myth and cult of Adonis, see <span
    class="smcaps">Torelli</span> 1997, pp. 233–91; by
    studying the iconographic and literary sources available, the author
    was able to interpret the so-called delta building of Gravisca as an
    *Adonion*, identifying each part of the structure with a specific
    phase of the ritual. For the iconographic documentation, see <span
    class="smcaps">Servais-Soyez</span> 1991.

[^10]: Apollodorus, *Bibliotheca* 3.14.4–5.

[^11]: On the relations between Adonis and the East, see <span
    class="smcaps">Ribichini</span> 1981, pp. 21–27,
    145–70; S. Ribichini, *Poenus advena: Gli dei fenici e
    l’interpretazione classica* (Rome, 1985), pp. 50–54.

[^12]: The spread of the cult of Adonis in Greek territory, according
    to Torelli, was encouraged by those distinctly eastern aspects of the
    god’s myth pertaining to royalty and the exercise of power, which
    found resonance in the Archaic Greek context; in this connection,
    see <span class="smcaps">Torelli</span> 1997, p.
    245.

[^13]: For the *pinakes* from Locri with the scene of the “youth with a
    ‘cista mystica,’” see <span class="smcaps">Torelli</span> 1997, p. 264; and H.
    Prückner, *Die Lokrischen Tonreliefs: Beitrag zur Kultgeschichte von
    Lokroi Epizephyroi* (Mainz, 1968), pp. 31–36; for Francavilla, see
    U. Spigo, “I pinakes di Francavilla di Sicilia: Nuova
    classificazione e brevi note sugli aspetti cultuali,” in *<span
    class="smcaps">Damarato</span>* 2000, pp. 211–12, types xix, xx; U. Spigo, entry no. 167, in <span class="smcaps">Pugliese Carratelli 1996</span>, p.
    647. For the iconography of Attic and Apulian vases, see <span
    class="smcaps">Torelli</span> 1997, p. 233, nn. 3–6; <span class="smcaps">Servais-Soyez</span> 1991, nos. 1, 5, 8–11, 27, 45–49.

[^14]: For Etruscan mirrors, see <span class="smcaps">Servais-Soyez</span> 1991,
    pp. 223–28, where Adonis is often depicted bare-chested, with long hair,
    sitting on a rock; see also <span class="smcaps">Rallo</span> 1974, no. 6, pl. XVI, no. 1. For the urn from Tuscania, see B. M. Felletti Maj, s.v.
    “Adone,” *<span class="smcaps">EAA</span>* 1 (Rome, 1984), pp. 68–71.

[^15]: For the *Adonion* of Gravisca, see <span
    class="smcaps">Torelli</span> 1997, pp. 234–44.

[^16]: See <span class="smcaps">Barra Bagnasco</span>
    1994.

[^17]: For the iconography of the *theogamia* represented by the seated
    embracing couple, see <span
    class="smcaps">Cassimatis</span> 1987, pp. 77–80.
    See also the group of Dionysos and Ariadne depicted in Attic vases
    from the first half of the fourth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span> in <span
    class="smcaps">Berti</span> 1991, nos. 10, 12–13.
    Adonis is depicted lifting a himation with his left hand on a volute
    krater by the Baltimore Painter: see A. D. Trendall, *Red-Figured
    Vases of South Italy and Sicily: A Handbook* (London, 1989), fig.
    251.

[^18]: In this connection, see <span
    class="smcaps">Servais-Soyez</span> 1991, p. 229.
    A comparable iconographic scheme can also be found in a bronze
    relief from the early Hellenistic period, found in Paramythia
    (Epirus), and perhaps depicting Aphrodite and Anchises on Mount Ida,
    for which a Tarentine origin has been conjectured; see C.
    Tzouvara-Souli, “Cults and Temples in Epirus, Magna Grecia and
    Sicily,” in *La Magna Grecia e i grandi santuari della madrepatria,
    AttiTaranto* *31, 1991* (Taranto, 1992), pp. 116–19, pl. IV, no. 4.
    For the seated male figure, depicted in three-quarter view, with
    legs crossed in a relaxed position, a figure found also in the
    coinage of Magna Graecia of the late fifth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>, see R. Ross Holloway,
    *Art and Coinage in Magna Graecia* (Bellinzona, 1978), pp. 58–59,
    138; L. Massei, “Schemi statuari nella ceramica apula,” *<span
    class="smcaps">Aparchai</span>* 1982, vol. 1, pp.
    483–500; see also the group of Ariadne and Dionysos (or a satyr)
    sitting on a rock in a Tarentine mold that was probably used for the
    decoration of *arulae*, vases, or *thymiateria* (incense burners);
    here too the male figure has his legs crossed and long hair: A.
    Muller, “Petite plastique de Tarente: Modeleurs et moulers,”
    *Genava* 48 (2000), pp. 37–54; see also the terracotta group of
    Aphrodite and Adonis from Nisyros, now in the Badisches Landesmuseum
    in Karlsruhe, published in J. Thimme, ed., *Antike Terrakotten*,
    Bildhefte des Badisches Landesmuseum (Karlsruhe, 1960), fig. 18.

[^19]: For the Derveni bronze krater, see C. Rolley, “Les bronzes grecs:
    Recherches récents,” *RA* 2 (1987), pp. 335–60, esp. pp. 352–57; E.
    Youri, *Ho Krateras tou Derveniou* (Athens, 1978), and B. S.
    Ridgway, “Court and Hellenistic Art,” in <span
    class="smcaps">Ridgway</span> 2004, pp. 158–84.
    See also M. Pfrommer, “Italien-Makedonien-Kleinasien:
    Interdependenzen spätklassischer und frühhellenistischer Toreutik,”
    *JdI* 98 (1983), pp. 235–85.

[^20]: The typological scheme with the knee grasped by crossed hands
    generally recurs in funerary contexts and the pose can express
    either grief or meditation; for female characters, see the two
    deities generally identified as Demeter and Kore sitting on a cista
    in the eastern pediment of the Parthenon: O. Palagia, *The Pediments
    of the Parthenon*, 2nd ed. (Leiden, 1993), p. 20. Also, a coin of
    Elis depicts the figure of Nike seated with crossed legs in a
    funerary context: L. Lacroix, “La Nike des monnaies d’Elis,” *Études
    d’archéologie numismatique* (Paris, 1974), pp. 13–21. See the figure
    of Electra in the scheme of the weeping woman on a panathenaic
    amphora in the Museo Archeologico Nazionale in Naples: A. D.
    Trendall, *The Red-Figured Vases of Lucania, Campania, and Sicily*
    (Oxford, 1967), p. 115, no. 597. But it is in the Attic white-ground
    lekythoi that this pose recurs frequently; see, for instance, D. C.
    Kurtz, *Athenian White Lekythoi: Painters and Patterns* (Oxford,
    1975), pls. 38.2, 44.1. The pose can also be found in male
    characters, for example in the figure of Amphiaraos engraved on an
    Etruscan mirror and in the figure on the Faliscan krater with the
    myth of the Argonauts, dating from the first half of the fourth
    century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>: <span
    class="smcaps">Rallo</span> 1974, pls. I, no. 1,
    pl. II, nos. 1–2. Hermes is depicted in the same pose on a
    red-figured kylix: see T. Dohrn, “Gefaltete und verschränkte Hände,”
    *JdI* 70 (1955), pp. 50–80. The seated figure on cat. 48 has also
    been identified as an attendant of Aphrodite, perhaps Peitho, the
    embodiment of erotic persuasion, who has carried the bridal chest
    for the wedding: see <span
    class="smcaps">Salapata</span> 2001, pp. 40–41.

[^21]: The type of the rectangular box with a flat lid and four small
    feet, in some cases quite large in size, is well attested in Magna
    Graecia from the second half of the fifth century and in the fourth
    century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>: see G. M.
    A. Richter, *The Furniture of the Greeks, Etruscan and Romans*
    (London, 1966), pp. 74–76. In the *pinakes* of Locri, the cista is a
    specific attribute of Persephone and emphasizes the powerful
    connection of the goddess of the Underworld with the world of women
    and marriage; see <span
    class="smcaps">Sourvinou-Inwood</span> 1978*,* pp.
    110, 116–18. Also, see a statuette from Medma, possibly depicting
    Persephone seated on a throne, holding a small box in her right
    hand: R. Miller, “The Terracotta Votives from Medma: Cult and
    Coroplastic Craft in Magna Graecia,” Ph.D. diss., University of
    Michigan (1984), p. 306, no. 23. For the presence of the box in
    depictions of the *adonia* in Attic and Apulian vases, see in
    particular the examples in <span
    class="smcaps">Servais-Soyez</span> 1991, nos. 45,
    46, and <span class="smcaps">Atallah</span> 1966,
    figs. 41, 42, 49. See also F. Lissarrague, “Women, Boxes,
    Containers: Some Signs and Metaphors,” in E. Reeder, *Pandora: Women
    in Classical Greece*, exh. cat. (Baltimore, Walters Art Gallery,
    1995), pp. 91–100.

[^22]: For the depictions on the two vases, see <span
    class="smcaps">Torelli</span> 1997, pp. 272–74; on
    the significance of the *anodos* of Adonis in connection with the
    ritual celebration, see pp. 269–70, 272–73.

[^23]: In this connection, consider Sappho’s fragment 140 concerning a
    lamentation of the death of Adonis: see E. M. Voigt, ed., *Sappho et
    Alcaeus: Fragmenta* (Amsterdam, 1971); see also the references in
    Thucydides (6.30) and Plutarch’s *Lives: Alcibiades* 18. For the
    manifestations of grief in the *adonia*, see <span
    class="smcaps">Torelli</span> 1997, pp. 263–65. In
    the context of Magna Graecia, Nossis, a female poet from Locri who
    was often linked to Sappho because of their mutual affiliation with
    a “female circle” dedicated to the handsome Adonis, in her sixth
    epigram urged the *korai* to beat their breasts and rend their
    chitons; in this connection, see M. Gigante, “Nosside,” *PdP*
    154–155 (1974), pp. 22–39. The ritual burial accompanied by funeral
    chants is also discussed in E. Di Filippo Balestrazzi, “Il giovane
    di Mozia: Una nuova ipotesi interpretativa,” *Numismatica e
    antichità classiche: Quaderni ticinesi* 24 (1995), pp. 133–64, n.
    124.

[^24]: For a structural analysis of the myth and the ritual, see M.
    Detienne, *I giardini di Adone* (Turin, 1975), which emphasizes the
    contrast between agrarian rites in honor of Demeter and the
    *adonia,* which were bound up with the concept of infecundity and
    fleeting sexual pleasure. Women participating in the rite, as an
    essential requirement for union with the deity, had to climb
    upstairs to the roof of the house, as is extensively documented in
    Italiote vase-painting.

[^25]: Alciphron (4.14) tells of a certain Philomena who, in the middle
    of the night, joined her friends to take part in the ritual of the
    *adonia*.

[^26]: In the fifteenth *Idyll*, dedicated to a description of an
    *adonion* celebrated in Alexandria in the third century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>, Theocritus reveals that,
    on the day after the celebration, women supposedly carried the body
    of Adonis to the seashore and, beating their breasts with disheveled
    hair, intoned a lamentation and tossed the simulacrum of the god and
    the “gardens” into the sea as a purification rite, awaiting the
    return of the young god: see Theocritus *Idylls* 129–33; see also
    the commentary in <span
    class="smcaps">Atallah</span> 1966, pp. 112–13. It
    is evident that the *adonia* could either take on the nature of a
    public celebration, as in Alexandria in the third century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>, or preserve a private
    and more licentious character, as documented on Attic and Italiote
    vases, especially those depicting the preparation of the “gardens”
    on the roofs of the houses. These were special occasions that
    offered women a measure of free expression, including sexual
    expression, outside of the rigid social boundaries by which they
    were restricted in Greek society. In this connection, see the
    vase-paintings in <span
    class="smcaps">Servais-Soyez</span> 1991, nos. 45,
    49.

[^27]: This tendency to portray the myth of Adonis as a stage drama, in
    keeping with the dynamics of ritual, can be clearly seen as well in
    vase-paintings and in scenes on Etruscan mirrors; see <span
    class="smcaps">Torelli</span> 1997, p. 275.

[^28]: For the ritual dances, see also L. Todisco, “La Tomba delle
    Danzatrici di Ruvo,” in idem, *Pittura e ceramica figurata tra
    Grecia, Magna Grecia e Sicilia* (Bari, 2006), pp. 17–40. The
    presence of the tympanon in the *adonia*, often associated with a
    sistrum*,* is attested in vase depictions: <span
    class="smcaps">Servais-Soyez</span> 1991, p. 224,
    no. 10; pp. 227–28, no. 48; <span
    class="smcaps">Torelli</span> 1997, p. 256, figs.
    22–23. On the role of music and aromas in rituals honoring Adonis,
    see <span class="smcaps">Ribichini</span> 1981,
    pp. 73–80, with special reference to the Eastern context that the
    Greeks adopted in interpreting this myth. For the presence of
    tympanon in terracotta female statuettes from Hellenistic period,
    frequently connected to the cult of Demeter, Kore, and Artemis, see
    A. Bellia, *Coroplastica con raffigurazioni musicali nella Sicilia
    greca, secoli VI–III a.C.* (Rome, 2009), pp. 163–65. For the role of
    the dance in the cult of Adonis, see H. A. Shapiro et al., s.v.
    “Dance,” *ThesCRA* 2 (2004), pp. 299–43, esp. p. 318.

[^29]: On the coroplastic art in Medma, see S. Settis, s.v. “Medma,”
    *<span class="smcaps">EAA</span>*, 3 suppl. (Rome,
    1995), pp. 580–82. For *arulae*, in particular, see M. Paoletti,
    “Arule di Medma e tragedie attiche,” in *<span
    class="smcaps">Aparchai</span>* 1982, pp. 372–92.
    On the dispersal of the terracottas of Medma onto the antiquities
    market and into private and museum collections, see <span
    class="smcaps">Paoletti</span> 1981, pp. 47–92.

[^30]: For the cult of Adonis in Locri see <span
    class="smcaps">Barra Bagnasco</span> 1994; for the
    role of Locri in the establishment of the religious system of Medma,
    see M. Paoletti, “I culti di Medma,” in <span
    class="smcaps">*Santuari della Magna Grecia in
    Calabria* 1996</span>, pp. 95–97. A myth of Eastern origin that
    featured Aphrodite and Persephone—deities who in Locri were strongly
    connected but also contrasting—was likely to find an enthusiastic
    reception in a context steeped in Eastern characteristics, where the
    central role of women in both religious cults and social life was
    well attested; see for this connection: <span
    class="smcaps">Sourvinou-Inwood</span> 1978.

[^31]: In this connection, see E. Manni, *Sicilia pagana* (Palermo,
    1963). At the end of the fifth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>, the tyrant Dionysius I
    of Syracuse, who married to a woman from Locri, composed a tragedy
    dedicated to Adonis. In addition, as mentioned in *Idyll* 15 of
    Theocritus, the two women who participate in the Alexandrian
    *adonia* were in fact Syracusan. For attestation of the cult of
    Adonis in Sicily as early as the first half of the fifth century
    <span class="smcaps">BC</span>, see U. Spigo, “I
    pinakes di Francavilla di Sicilia: Nuova classificazione e brevi
    note sugli aspetti cultuali,” in *<span
    class="smcaps">Damarato</span>* 2000, pp.
    211–12.

[^32]: For cultural and artistic influences in Locri, see M. Barra
    Bagnasco, “Apporti esterni ed elaborazione locale nella coroplastica
    locrese tra V e IV secolo a.C.,” *BdA* 25 (1984), pp. 39–52.
    Regarding the Locri area, consider the private aspect of the cult of
    Adonis identified by Barra Bagnasco in the “Casa dei Leoni,” which
    is similar to Athenian ritual of the fifth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>: see <span
    class="smcaps">Barra Bagnasco</span> 1994.

[^33]: The depiction of space would become an especially important theme
    in the Tarentine reliefs as well; for the influence of the
    coroplastic production on subsequent stone sculpture, see <span
    class="smcaps">Carter</span> 1975, pp. 28–29,
    36–37.

[^34]: A combination of “pictoricism” and plasticity characterizes a
    number of Attic works; for an instance, see <span
    class="smcaps">Ridgway</span> 1997, p. 6, for the
    stele of Dexileos. The locks of hair with their sinuous curls are
    reminiscent of the style of the Chequer Painter, active in Sicily
    between the end of the fifth century and the beginning of the fourth
    century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>; he was
    influenced by such Attic artists as the Meidias Painter and was
    especially in tune with the echoes of post-Phidian mannerism. In
    this connection, see M. De Cesare, “Il Pittore della Scaccheria e la
    nascita della ceramografia figurate siceliota,” in <span
    class="smcaps">Ampolo</span> 2009, pp. 277–94; and
    A. D. Trendall, “New Vases by the Chequer Painter,” in H. Froning
    and T. Hölscher, *Kotinos*: *Festschrift für Erika Simon* (Mainz,
    1992), pp. 301–5*.* Similar characteristics can also be found in
    coroplastic work, such as the dancing maenad of Locri: see P. E.
    Arias, “La menade di Locri,” in *Alessandria e il mondo
    ellenistico-romano: Studi in onore di Achille Adriani* (Rome,
    1983–84), pp. 677–79. For the mannerism of the drapery, see the
    stele from Kos, from the end of the fifth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>, in A. M. Comella, _I
    rilievi votivi greci di periodo arcaico e classico: Diffusione,
    ideologia, committenza_ (Bari, 2002), fig. 83, p. 89.

[^35]: For the influence of Attic vases in Sicily, see F. Giudice, “La
    ceramica attica del IV secolo a.C. in Sicilia ed il problema della
    formazione delle officine locale,” in <span
    class="smcaps">_La Sicilia dei due Dionisi_</span>
    2002, pp. 169–201; U. Spigo, “Il problema degli influssi della
    pittura vascolare attica nella ceramica a figure rosse,” in _I vasi
    attici ed altre ceramiche coeve in Sicilia: Atti del convegno
    internazionale: Catania, Camarina, Gela, Vittoria, 28 marzo–1 aprile
    1990_, Cronache di archeologia 29–30 (Catania, 1996), pp. 51–65. The
    “omega” folds can be found in figures by the Painter of Bologna 501
    dating from the first half of the fourth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>; the refined definition
    of the folds in the draping cloth would become a stylistic motif in
    the work of such vase-painters as the followers of the Tarporley
    Painter and the artists of the Long Overfalls Group; see A. D.
    Trendall and A. Cambitoglou, _The Red-Figured Vases of Apulia_, vol.
    1 (Oxford, 1978), pp. 63–68, 79–80; for the Painter of Bologna 501,
    see pp. 97–98. The sensitive modeling, especially noticeable in the
    profiles and the treatment of the eyelids, as well as the fluent
    rendering of the hairstyles, is also reminiscent of the female heads
    found in the series of coins made by Kimon and Euainetos in the late
    fifth and early fourth centuries <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>; see G. K. Jenkins,
    _Coins of Greek Sicily_ (London, 1976), figs. 68–70, pp. 52–58. For
    the Attic influence in the coinage of Magna Graecia at the end of
    the fifth century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>,
    see N. Franco Parise, “Le emissioni monetarie di Magna Graecia:
    Dalla fondazione di Thuri all’età di Archidamo,” in <span
    class="smcaps">Settis</span> 1994, pp. 403–19,
    figs. 15–17.

[^36]: In the *arula* from Medma with a representation of Pirithous
    (king of the Lapiths), similar characteristics are found, such as
    the jutting rocks; the female figure, seated and lost in thought;
    the position of Pirithous; and a naïveté in the rendering of the
    poses and certain details; see <span
    class="smcaps">Paoletti</span> 1981, pl. 96, no.
    1; S. Settis, “Bellerofonte a Medma,” in <span
    class="smcaps">Settis</span> 1987, pp. 250–58, and
    in that same volume, for the female head in Geneva, see his essay
    “Una testa di Medma da Atene a Ginevra,” pp. 263–83.

[^37]: S. Settis, “Una testa di Medma,” op. cit., pp. 269–70, 280.

[^38]: For the Athenian influences in the area of Locri and the
    diffusion of the Adonis cult, see M. Barra Bagnasco, pp. 326–33 in
    *Mito e storia in Magna Grecia*: *AttiTaranto* *36, 1996* (Taranto,
    1997); on the affinity between Locrian and Attic *pinakes*, see M.
    C. Parra, “L’arte greca in Italia meridionale, tra scoperte,
    riscoperte e ricezione” in <span
    class="smcaps">Catoni and Settis</span> 2008, pp.
    79–91, esp. pp. 84–85. On the derivation of Locri’s *pinakes* from
    Syracusan models, see M. C. Parra, “Pinakes di Hipponium,” *Annali
    della Scuola normale superiore di Pisa* (1989), pp. 559–65. Compare
    also a stele from Crotone datable to the end of the fifth century
    BC, deeply derivative of an Attic model: E. Lattanzi, “Osservazioni
    su una stele funeraria in marmo con scena di commiato,” in R. Belli
    Pasqua and R. Spadea, *Kroton e il suo territorio tra VI e V secolo
    a.C.: Aggiornamenti e nuove ricerche: Atti del Convengo di Studio,
    Crotone 3–5 marzo 2000* (Crotone, 2005), pp. 19–23; and M. Corrado
    and R. E. Malena, “Esperienze di scultura attica post-fidiaca in
    Magna Grecia: Esame tecnico di una presunta stele funeraria
    polimaterica da Kroton,” *BdA* vol. speciale, *International
    Congress of Classical Archaeology: Meetings between Cultures in the
    Ancient Mediterranean* (Rome, 2008), pp. 57–67. For the cultural
    exchanges between Locri and Medma with regard to the distribution of
    terracottas, see <span class="smcaps">Miller
    Ammerman</span> 1985, pp. 5–19. On the possible intermediary role
    played by Syracuse in the spread of Attic art to Locri, see P. E.
    Arias, “L’arte locrese nelle sue principali manifestazioni
    artigianali: Terrecotte, bronzi, vasi, arti minori,” in *Locri
    Epizefiri, AttiTaranto* 16, 1976 (Naples, 1977), pp. 503–5. On the
    array of problems linked to Attic influences in the context of
    pottery workshops in Sicily and Locri, see also U. Spigo,
    “Composizione e racconto: Documenti di cultura pittorica nella
    ceramica siceliota del IV secolo a.C. dalle necropoli di Lipari,” in
    M. Barra Bagnasco and M. C. Conti, eds., *Studi di archeologia
    classica dedicati a Giorgio Gullini* (Turin, 1999), pp. 186–87; see
    also F. Giudice, *Vasi e frammenti “Beazley” da Locri Epizefiri e
    ruolo di questa città lungo le rotte verso l’Occidente* (Catania,
    1989), pp. 90–91, 96–105. Also on relations between Athens and South
    Italy in the context of pottery production and the comparative
    iconographical choices in the second half of the fifth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC,</span> see L. Todisco, “Atene e
    Magna Grecia: Percorsi iconologici,” *Ostraka* 6, no. 1 (1997), pp.
    135–53.

[^39]: As pointed out above, burning incense or other aromatic
    substances must have been an integral part of the rituals honoring
    Adonis.
