---
title: Head of a Male Banqueter
cat: 7
fabric: >
  Beige in color with light green nuances (Munsell 2.5 yr 8/3–8/4), highly purified, porous, and friable in consistency. Surface covered with a layer of slip of diluted clay. Paint: traces of red color on the hair and ocher on the forehead.
condition: >
  Preserved are the head, neck, and part of the tenon for insertion into the torso; a small portion of a wreath remains behind the nape of the neck. The nose is chipped. The surface is covered with incrustations that conceal the surviving traces of paint.
bibliography: >
  Unpublished.
provenance: >
  1982, Antike Kunst Palladion (Basel, Switzerland), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1982.
---
The head formed part of a statue, as is shown by the tenon, still
preserved at the base of the broad, flared neck, which was used to
attach the head to the figure’s bust. The back portion of the head shows
hasty, summary modeling; the wreath and hair were applied separately
before the firing. A circular opening can be seen in the back of the
neck.

The face is round and full, the eyes have thickened eyelids that are
asymmetrical and irregular in shape; the mouth, barely half-open, has
fleshy lips. The hair is parted in a “pincer” style over the forehead
and arranged around the face with lively locks defined by fine
striations. The head must once have had a headdress with bands that fell
on either side of the face and a wreath: a distinctive element in the
typology of banqueters to which this head is linked. A number of heads
of statuettes of banqueters from Taranto wear wreaths with rosettes
topped by a complicated floral *fastigium* (crown).[^1] The most
distinctive element is the hairstyle, in which it is possible to
recognize a Polykleitan influence that extended in Taras even beyond the
fifth century <span class="smcaps">BC.</span>[^2] The
head, larger than other comparable heads (which generally belong to
medium-sized statuettes), presents a nesting system by means of which it
was inserted into the body of the statue, a technique not unusual in
coroplastic workshops.[^3]

[^1]: There are numerous comparisons with statuettes of varying sizes
    from the Tarentine context, for example: <span
    class="smcaps">Iacobone</span> 1988, pp. 95–96,
    pl. 90a–b, head and bust of banqueters from the votive deposits of
    the Via di Palma and of Contrada Corti Vecchie, datable to the first
    half of the fourth century <span
    class="smcaps">BC</span>; the statuette from the
    votive deposit of the Via di Palma, inv. 200354 in the Museo
    Nazionale Archeologico di Taranto; and the piece in <span
    class="smcaps">Caporusso</span> 1975, no. 14, pl.
    IX, from the end of the fifth to the beginning of the fourth century
    <span class="smcaps">BC.</span> Dating to the same
    period is a head with traces of red color on the hair; see <span
    class="smcaps">Leyenaar-Plaisier</span> 1979, vol.
    1, no. 155, pl. 27; <span
    class="smcaps">Breitenstein</span> 1941, p. 17,
    no. 10; <span class="smcaps">Herdejürgen</span>
    1971, no. 25, fig. 9; <span
    class="smcaps">Levi</span> 1926, fig. 38, no. 141;
    <span class="smcaps">Bartoccini</span> 1936, fig.
    56, p. 158 (head of a banqueter with the same arrangement of locks
    of hair from a votive deposit in Contrada Corti Vecchie); the head
    from the Fondo Giovinazzi in Taranto, from the late fourth century
    <span class="smcaps">BC</span> in <span
    class="smcaps">Higgins</span> 1954, pl. 176, nos.
    1284–85; and the unpublished piece now in the Musei Civici di
    Trieste, <span class="smcaps">Poli</span> 2010,
    cat. 376, p. 241, from the end of the fifth to the beginning of the
    fourth century <span class="smcaps">BC.</span> See
    also the Metapontine head in <span
    class="smcaps">Letta</span> 1971, pl. XII, no. 3,
    pp. 84–86. A metal wreath imitating a braiding of branches,
    garlands, and festoons was also found among grave goods. It is
    generally considered to be related to eschatological beliefs. For
    the headgear, see also head at [cat. 21](21).

[^2]: In this connection, consider the Herakles by Polkleitos: P. C.
    Bol, *Polyklet: Der Bildhauer der griechischen Klassik*, exh. cat.
    (Frankfurt, Museum Alter Plastik, 1993), pp. 199–205, characterized
    by hair in short locks, flattened and adhering to the skull. This
    creation can be assigned to the artist’s maturity.

[^3]: From Lucera, compare the head dating to the end of the fourth
    century <span class="smcaps">BC</span>, possibly
    originally part of a full-size figure, in <span
    class="smcaps">D’Ercole</span> 1990, p. 69, pl.
    13a.
